# Abstract {.page_break_before .unnumbered .unlisted}
\markboth{Abstract}{}

The detailed assessment of the composition of plants or plant-derived products is of utmost interest to industrial sectors, public health, and basic research.
The metabolites in plants’ natural extracts (NE) constitute the plant metabolome, which can be divided into the core and the specialized metabolome.
Plants produce specialized metabolites to ensure their survival in a competitive environment.
In assessing the composition of NE, current validated methods for rigorous metabolite annotation and quantification require standards.
However, among the 300,000 reported specialized metabolites, the availability of commercial reference standards is heavily restricted.
Given this limitation, common analytical methods for NE composition assessment focus on studying a few specific and often non-bioactive markers.

Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a method of choice for NE metabolite profiling because of its high sensitivity and separation power.
Annotating massive and complex spectral data sets generated by these state-of-the-art high-resolution LC-MS systems remains challenging.
Dereplication allows focused efforts on potentially novel compounds to overcome this challenge by leveraging prior knowledge together with modern computational tools with a strong dependency on data availability and reporting practices.

In this respect and in the frame of the present thesis, two resources to improve dereplication were developed.
The first is the Taxonomically Informed Metabolite Annotation (TIMA), which allows for better decision-making when multiple structural candidates are suggested by current MS-based annotation workflows.
The second is LOTUS, an initiative for open knowledge management in natural products research, that provides the largest collection of metabolite-taxon pairs.
Combined together, these open tools and resources address dereplication issues in an unprecedented way.
Integrating them with complementary cutting-edge annotation tools led to the best results in recognized international contests.

In addition to annotation, semi-quantitative aspects are crucial for NE composition evaluation.
They are needed to document the use of NEs as products (phytopharmaceuticals, cosmetics, or natural ingredients) and assess the presence and concentration level of potentially toxic compounds.
Such information may also provide a rationale to justify specific molecules’ contribution to an extract's overall bioactivity.
Nevertheless, generic methods generating a semi-quantitative assessment of the large panel of metabolites are still lacking.
Furthermore, their concentrations in plants vary by several orders of magnitude.
Typically, only a dozen metabolites account for most of the extract's mass, while hundreds are present in trace amounts.

Therefore, effective procedures providing a comprehensive analysis of the metabolome of NEs are needed, further addressing both qualitative and quantitative aspects.
This work combines qualitative and semi-quantitative information in an automated manner, by integrating LC-MS-based metabolite profiling with generic universal detection methods.
The impact of this strategy is evaluated on public data, collaborations, and well-known plants of the European pharmacopeia chosen to represent ideally the diversity of plant metabolites.
Its application to different research questions is demonstrated, i.e. through flavoring plants of industrial interest such as *Swertia chirayita* (Roxb.) H. Karst, containing large quantities of bitter principles.
Our workflow integrating analytical and computational strategies aims to make plant metabolomics research more effective for public health, food and beverage safety, as well as fundamental science.

\pagenumbering{gobble}