# Abstract {.page_break_before .unnumbered .unlisted}
\markboth{Abstract}{}

The detailed assessment of the composition of plants or plant-derived products is of utmost interest to industrial sectors, public health, and basic research.
The metabolites in plants’ natural extracts ([NE](#ne)) constitute the plant metabolome, which can be divided into the core and the specialized metabolome.
Plants produce specialized metabolites to ensure their survival in a competitive environment.
To assess the composition of [NE](#ne)s, currently validated methods for rigorous annotation and quantification of metabolites require standards.
However, among the 300,000 reported specialized metabolites, the availability of commercial reference standards is heavily restricted.
Given this limitation, common analytical methods for [NE](#ne) composition assessment focus on studying a few specific and often non-bioactive markers.

Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry ([LC](#lc)-[MS](#ms)) is a method of choice for [NE](#ne) metabolite profiling because of its high sensitivity and separation power.
Annotating massive and complex spectral data sets generated by these high-resolution [LC](#lc)-[MS](#ms) systems remains challenging.
Dereplication allows focusing efforts on potentially novel compounds, overcoming this challenge by leveraging prior knowledge and modern computational tools.
However, it remains highly dependent on data availability and annotation practices.

In this respect and in the frame of the present thesis, two resources to improve dereplication were developed.
The first is the Taxonomically Informed Metabolite Annotation ([TIMA](#tima)), which allows for better decision-making when multiple structural candidates are suggested by current [MS](#ms)-based annotation tools.
The second is LOTUS, an initiative for open knowledge management in natural products research, that provides the largest collection of metabolite-taxon pairs.
Combined together, these open tools and resources address the issues of dereplication in an unprecedented way.
Integrating them with complementary cutting-edge annotation tools led to the best results in recognized international contests.

In addition to annotation, semi-quantitative aspects are crucial for [NE](#ne) composition evaluation.
They are needed to document the use of [NE](#ne)s as products (phytopharmaceuticals, cosmetics, or natural ingredients) and assess the presence and concentration level of potentially toxic compounds.
Such information may also provide a rationale to justify specific molecules’ contribution to an extract's overall bioactivity.
Nevertheless, generic methods generating a semi-quantitative assessment of a large panel of metabolites are still lacking.
Furthermore, their concentration in plants varies by several orders of magnitude.
Typically, only a dozen metabolites account for most of the extract's mass, while hundreds are present in trace amounts.

Therefore, effective procedures providing a comprehensive analysis of the metabolome of [NE](#ne)s are needed, further addressing both qualitative and quantitative aspects.
This work combines qualitative and semi-quantitative information in an automated manner, by integrating [LC](#lc)-[MS](#ms)-based metabolite profiling with generic universal detection methods.
The impact of this strategy is evaluated on public data, collaborations, and well-known plants of the European pharmacopeia, chosen to represent ideally the diversity of plant metabolites.
Its application to different research questions is illustrated, i.e. through flavoring plants of industrial interest such as *Swertia chirayita* (Roxb.) H. Karst, containing large quantities of bitter principles.
The presented workflow, integrating analytical and computational strategies, aims to make plant metabolomics research more effective for public health, food and beverage safety, as well as fundamental science.

\pagenumbering{gobble}