# Acknowledgements {.page_break_before .unnumbered .unlisted}
\markboth{Acknowledgements}{}

The following acknowledgements are not intended to be exhaustive and are limited to those who had a direct influence on the work presented.
My most intimate and familial thanks will not be found here, as they could not be properly translated in writing.
My thanks will be addressed according to the date on which I met the person thanked.

I cannot thank enough Urs-Benno Birchler, who introduced me to botany and who developed in me a passion for phytochemistry and pharmacy in the broadest sense.

I must also thank Vassily Vorobiev, with whom I have shared, for more than 20 years, the same passion for pharmacy and sports.
Without even being able to count the hours spent between weight training and respective training, спасибо!

I would like to thank Guillaume Cabane, another friend whose shared passions are not limited to pharmacy, and whose oxygen has made many projects grow!

I also wish to thank *another Guillaume*, Guillaume Bertoli, with whom the hours of mathematics in German at the gymnasium were able to develop a pronounced taste for sciences as well as for other hopped drinks...even beyond the Sarine!

I must also thank Alice Mainetti, the Ticino style, with whom I shared my university benches and started my doctorate.
To the one whose nickname has crossed the ages: Grazie! *Scorfi*

I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Jean-Luc Wolfender for welcoming me in his team and directing my thesis work.
His vision and his open-mindedness towards complex projects were invaluable.
Where many would have refused, he gave me his trust, and was always ready for *brainstorming sessions out loud*.
Thank you for the *degree of freedom* you gave me!

I also had great pleasure of following the teachings of Philippe Christen, whose commitment to a fairer Science has been a model.
In the same lineage, I would like to thank Sylvian Cretton for all the bitter-informed discussions we had.

I would like to recognize the help that I received from Xavier Chillier, student advisor, who after only one semester and five minutes in his office advised me to abandon my studies.

I also had great pleasure of following the teachings of Youssef Daali, who, during his courses, developed my interest in untargeted metabolomics and precision medicine.
I would like to thank him for agreeing to be part of my jury.

I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Davide Righi, whom I knew as an assistant, before becoming colleagues, friends, and backpack companions!

I am also grateful to Ombretta Panero, who supervised my master thesis and further confirmed my taste for volatiles and analytics.

I am deeply indebted to Ivano Tonutti, representin Tradall SA, who laid the groundwork for this thesis.
His attentive eye and his curiosity for ancestral knowledge have been a great inspiration.
His questions about more efficient ways to study extract composition automatically led to the chapter @sec:cascade.

I would also like to extend my deepest gratitude to Pierre-Marie Allard, also known as the irone-man.
After deliberately changing my office to exchange more regularly, he became my mentor during this thesis.
His deep-rooted passion for science and the many debates we had were the greatest scientific elevator I have ever experienced.
He is the surfer of the next wave, the one you can only see with a macroscope!

I would like to acknowledge the assistance of Frederic Borlat and Laurence Marcourt.
They are technical and spectroscopic pillars of the group and their help has been precious.

Special thanks to Natalie Schregle-Aeschlimann, whose kindness and efficiency will have made you forget any administrative task.

Special thanks to Miwa Dounoue-Kubo, whom I had the pleasure to share my first article.
Domo arigato gozaimasu!

Words are not enough to express my gratitude to *Magdi* Rausch.
*Für den Kaffee am Morgen, den Austausch auf Berggipfeln und vieles mehr bis zum Sonnenuntergang, **danke**!*

I also had great pleasure of working with Katharina Strommer at Bionorica research GmbH, during my stay in Innsbruck.
Many thanks also go to Bianka Siewert and Fabian Mayr from the University of Innsbruck!

In Innsbruck, I also had the great pleasure of meeting Judith Rollinger, whom I would like to thank for agreeing to be part of my jury.

I am extremely grateful to Jonathan Bisson, for all the knowledge he brought me.
The balance of his values, his knowledge, and his desire to transmit is as rare as good hackers (and inversely proportional to the ubiquity of sitosterol).
Merci le 
\notes \qa e \enotes
τ
chimiste!

I would like to acknowledge all the members of the Lotus Initiative:

- Ladies first, Maria Sorokina, whose skills, *Hallöschen*, and smile made the technical meetings lighter. Besides that, thanks you for the insider tips!
- Egon Willighagen, Daniel Mietchen, and Ralf Stephan who have helped enormously with all the Wikidata aspects and their previous knowledge on the topics.
- All co-authors which made this initiative possible.

I gratefully acknowledge the collaboration I had with the University of Basel, and more particularly Tanja Hell, Eliane Garo and Matthias Hamburger.

I gratefully acknowledge the collaboration I had with l'école du vin in Changins, and more particularly Pascale Deneulin, Benoit Bach, Eve Dante, Amandine Pasquier, and Pierrick Rébénaque-Martinez.
Thanks should also go to the panelists, who suffered the most during several weeks.
Merci!

I also had great pleasure of working with many former or actual members of the Phytochemistry & bioactive natural products group: Emerson Ferreira Queiroz, Joëlle Houriet, Léonie Pellissier, Hugo Morin, Josep Massana Codina, Théo Brillatz, Arnaud Gaudry, Luis Quiros-Guerrero, Robin Huber, Olivier Kirchhoffer, Alexandre Bory, Quentin Favre-Godal, Rémy Marcellin-Gros, Louis-Felix Nothias, and all the visitors we had!

Finally, I am extremely grateful to Nicola Zamboni, who, in addition to accepting to be part of my jury, gave me the opportunity to participate in the Dagstuhl seminar and to open new horizons.

\pagenumbering{gobble}
\newpage