## Phytochemistry & Human Uses

Phytochemistry is the study of the chemical constituents of plants.
Following the work of Sertümer, and thanks to the technical developments mentioned later in this introduction, many other plants have been studied for their chemical composition.
This led to the discovery of compounds of importance to humans, some of which will be detailed later.
Because of its two objects of study, phytochemistry is a subcategory of chemistry and botany.

On the chemistry side, the GDB-17 chemical universe database enumerated a chemical space of 166 billion small molecules (organic compounds of intermediate polarity with [MW](#mw) ≤ 500 Da) [@doi:10.1021/ci300415d].
GDB-17 was built using up to 17 atoms of C, N, O, S, and halogens.
These molecules were, however, computer-generated and were by far not observed.
The number of known chemical compounds in PubChem, the world's largest collection of freely accessible chemical information, is 111 million [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa971].
While almost all of these compounds were generated by combinatorial chemistry, a portion of them were isolated from biological organisms, the [NP](#np)s.
There are about 200,000 known [NP](#np)s, about two-thirds of which are found in plants.
All chemical compounds can be classified into groups, based on different criteria, such as the functional groups they contain.
In the case of [NP](#np)s, further classification is possible based on the biosynthetic pathway likely used to synthesize the compound.

Biological organisms can also be classified into groups.
Taxonomy describes and circumscribes living organisms in terms of species and organizes them into hierarchical categories called taxa.
There are around 374,000 known, described, and accepted plant species [@doi:10.11646/phytotaxa.261.3.1].
Organisms commonly referred to as plants correspond to the taxon Embryophyta. 
Land plants (Embryophyta) are generally divided into non-vascular plants (Bryophyta), or mosses, and vascular plants (Tracheophyta).
However, the chemistry of only a few of these has been studied.
All along the introduction, except otherwise mentioned, information related to chemical compounds found in organisms comes from the *Lotus Initiative* [@doi:10.7554/eLife.70780].
The *Lotus Initiative* and the establishment of the related knowledge base will be detailed in Chapter @sec:lotus.

Figure @fig:intro-1 presents an illustration of the Tracheophyta families hierarchically organized according to the Open Tree of Life taxonomy version 3.3 [@doi:10/ggkjbt], as well as the coverage of phytochemical studies conducted to date.

![**Current status of phytochemical knowledge**. Chemically-informed biological trees representing current knowledge of vascular plants (present in the Open Tree of Life taxonomy version 3.3) and their chemistry. In panel A, the families of Tracheophyta are represented. If at least 50 compounds are reported in a family, it is colored. Less than 50% of the families are known to contain at least 50 compounds. In panel B, the genera of the most studied family, Asteraceae, are represented. Only 10% of the genera of Asteraceae are known to contain at least 50 compounds.](images/intro-trees.pdf){#fig:intro-1 short-caption="Current status of phytochemical knowledge" align="center" width="95%"}

On both trees, the size of the taxon name is proportional to the number of compounds found in it.
The tree in panel A is composed of 487 families of Tracheophyta, of which 213 (44%) are known to have at least 50 compounds reported.
The family with the most known species is Orchidaceae, with about 28,000 species [@doi:10.11646/phytotaxa.261.3.1].
The family with the most known compounds is Asteraceae, with about 25,000 compounds, or more than 10% of all known plant compounds.
Asteraceae is also the second largest family in terms of number of species, with about 24,700 species [@doi:10.11646/phytotaxa.261.3.1].

Other families that appear to be well studied are Fabaceae (12,853), Lamiaceae (9,993), Rutaceae (5,780), Apocynaceae (5,539), Euphorbiaceae (4,862), Apiaceae (4,169), Meliaceae (4,112), Solanaceae (3,938) and Rubiaceae (3,466).
The number of known compounds in the Tracheophyta families is available in Appendix @sec:appendix-intro-1.
These families will serve as examples in the next subchapter on modern applications of phytochemistry.

Interestingly, the most studied plant, the model organism *A. thaliana* (L.) Heynh. (Brassicaceae), is located on a part of the tree with poorly studied clades (on the left side of the tree, just above the Fabaceae, and below an entire gray area).
This illustrates how targeted phytochemical research is.

While 44% coverage of families may seem satisfactory, panel B tempers this claim.
Indeed, even among the most studied plant family (1700 genera), only about 10% (176 genera) of genera are known to contain at least 50 compounds.
Entire areas of the Asteraceae tree are barely studied from a phytochemical point of view, leaving much to be discovered.
Among the Asteraceae, the largest genus in terms of number of species is *Senecio*, with over 1,250 species [@doi:10.2307/25065905].
*Senecio* spp. are known to contain about 1,000 (967) compounds, making it the second most studied genus of Asteraceae, behind *Artemisia*.
*Artemisia* genus is known to contain 2,629 compounds and consists of about 500 species [@doi:10.3109/13880209.2010.497815].
The number of known compounds in the Asteraceae genera is available in Appendix @sec:appendix-intro-2.

*Artemisia* will be the starting point of the next subchapter.

### Pharmacognosy & Drug Discovery

Among the many successful modern applications of phytochemistry, one of the most notable is the discovery of artemisinin as part of a plant screening research program initiated in 1967 in China.
Tu Youyou's discovery of artemisinin from the leaves of *Artemisia annua* L. in 1972 earned her the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2015.

Tu Youyou's work is a perfect example of pharmacognosy and the diverse areas it encompasses.
According to the *American Society of Pharmacognosy*, areas included are: 

> «*medicinal properties of natural products, for the purposes of drug discovery and understanding how dietary supplements work (...), analytical methods (...), use of traditional remedies by native cultures (...), evaluation and species verification (...), natural products for specific agricultural purposes (...), novel foods or food ingredients (...), cosmetic application (...), genetic biosynthetic pathways (...)*» [@url:https://www.pharmacognosy.us/what-is-pharmacognosy].

The discovery of Artemisinin and its properties will be used to introduce various notions mentioned above related to pharmacognosy.
Further examples will be used to illustrate complementary aspects of drug discovery

First of all, over 200 Chinese herbs were extracted [@doi:10.1038/nm.2471].
Those herbs were selected based on prior knowledge.
The importance of prior knowledge and its accessibility will be discussed more thoroughly in Chapter @sec:computational.
Previous knowledge not only influenced the initial selection, but the overall process.
Indeed, while the *Artemisia annua* L. extract showed an inteteresting activity, it was difficult to reproduce [@doi:10.1038/nm.2471].
When going back to literature, Youyou realized the traditional preparation of *Artemisia annua* L. was never heaten.
She therefore realized that the heat used in the extraction process was actually destroying the active principle [@doi:10.1038/nm.2471].
After optimization of the extraction and isolation, she was able to determine that the activity of the extract was due to artemisinin.
The further analytical challenges faced during the process will be later in a dedicated chapter.

The discovery of artemisinin is a brilliant example of drug discovery.
Modern drug discovery is a very expensive process, with an estimated cost of $1.8 billion for a single molecule [@doi:10.1038/nrd3078].
Drug discovery has been heavily influenced by the emergence of genome sequencing.
Genome sequencing has enabled the rapid synthesis and purification of proteins, making testing against single targets possible.
The shift from testing a complex mixture in a complex system to reducing to a single compound against a single target seemed ideal.
Therefore, in the 1990s, combinatorial chemistry began to synthesize myriads of new compounds on the premise that the greater the number of compounds tested, the greater the chance of success.
Combinatorial chemistry was not as successful as expected, mainly because the chemical space generated did not match that of biologically relevant compounds [@doi:10.1038/nrd4510].
Since then, drug discovery has essentially followed two distinct strategies.

The oldest strategy is *phenotypic* drug discovery or classical pharmacology.
In this approach, single extracts or molecules are tested for a given biological activity, with the results measured phenotypically, without prior knowledge of the biological target.
Modern drug discovery by phenotyping is still considered a viable pharmaceutical strategy [@doi:10.1021/jm201649s].

Among notable examples related to Figure @fig:intro-1, reserpin was isolated from *Rauvolfia serpentina* (L.) Benth. ex Kurz (Apocynaceae) by Ciba researchers [@doi:10.1007/BF02174406].
Reserpine was discovered for its sedative effects and was approved in 1955 by the Food and Drug Administration ([FDA](#fda)) for the treatment of hypertension.
Other examples of drugs isolated from the Apocynaceae family are vincristine and vinblastine, two chemotherapies.
Both were isolated from the leaves of *Catharanthus roseus* (L.) G.Don.
The example of *Catharanthus roseus*, traditionally used in Madagascar long before the discoveries of vinblastine and vincristine, raises important questions about intellectual property.
The debate over *"Who Owns Native Culture"* [@isbn:9780674016330] may also partly explain the pharmaceutical industry's disinterest in [NP](#np)s.
Both are still on the World Health Organization ([WHO](#who)) [Essential Drugs List](https://list.essentialmeds.org) [@url:https://list.essentialmeds.org].

Another [NP](#np) present in the [WHO](#who) essential drug list and produced by one of the well-studied families in Figure @fig:intro-1 is quinine.
Quinine was isolated in 1820 by Pelletier from two species of *Cinchona*, namely *Cinchona pubescens* Vahl (first described as *Quinquina succirubra* (Pav. ex Klotzsch) Kuntze) and *Cinchona calisaya* Wedd. (Rubiaceae).
Since quinine is known not only for its pharmacological properties but also for its taste, it will be described in more detail later in this chapter.

The other strategy used in drug discovery is a *target-based* strategy, also known as reverse pharmacology.
It avoids the screening step and has led to multiple successful discoveries, such as the Nobel Prize in 1988 [@doi:10.1126/science.2569237, @doi:10.1007/BF01119794].
The difficulties inherent in high-throughput screening of [NP](#np)s can therefore be avoided, which has led pharmaceutical companies to focus on libraries of synthetic compounds [@doi:10.1126/science.1168243].
Nevertheless, as they acquired specific ligand-protein binding motifs, [NP](#np)s cover a chemical space that cannot be met by synthetic compounds in commercially available screening libraries, making them great candidates for target-based discovery [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2018.12.007].
Among the functional advantages in regard to synthetic compounds, [NP](#np)s contain more aliphatic rings per molecule, more bridgehead atoms and chiral centers [@doi:10/b849kr].

Target-based strategies require to know the enzyme involved in the biological process targeted, without necessarily knowing the binding site.
The search for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors to treat dementia is one example of target-based strategy.
Those search are often performed in comparison to galantamine [@doi:10.4155/fmc.11.67; @doi:10.1016/j.rechem.2022.100286], a known acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, which was isolated from different *Galanthus* spp. [@doi:10.3389/fphar.2020.552453].
Another known [NP](#np) inhibiting acetylcholinesterase is Huperzine A.
Huperzine A has been isolated from various *Huperzia* spp. [@doi:10.1016/j.tetlet.2011.05.133].
It was also isolated from *Lycopodium* spp. [@10.1248/cpb.56.1473].
*Huperzia* and *Lycopodium* are clubmosses.
Until recently, *Huperzia* belonged to *Lycopodium*.
This highlights the very strong link between taxonomy and chemistry which will be discussed later on.
In order to refine target-based strategies, thee need for more defined binding sites, allowing for more defined molecular interactions, are needed.
The recognition of binding sites requires heavy computational aspects [@doi:10.1007/s10822-019-00235-7].
Computational aspects, not necessarily involving binding site recognition, will be discussed in Chapter @sec:computational.

The different above mentioned processes aim at the same final objective: a drug.

Among the 16 new drugs approved by the [FDA](#fda) in 2022, only one is a [NP](#np) [@url:https://www.fda.gov/drugs/new-drugs-fda-cders-new-molecular-entities-and-new-therapeutic-biological-products/novel-drug-approvals-2022].
Tapinarof, indicated in the treatment of psoriasis, was already found as an antibiotic in 1988 in Xenorhabdus luminescens Thomas & Poinar (now Photorhabdus luminescens) [@doi:10.1128/aem.54.6.1602-1605.1988].

In Switzerland, 30 new drugs were approved in 2022 for human use, none being a [NP](#np) [@url:https://www.swissmedic.ch/swissmedic/en/home/humanarzneimittel/authorisations/new-medicines.html].
In parallel, Swissmedic authorized 8 new complementary medicinal products in 2021, mainly homeopathic [@url:https://www.swissmedic.ch/swissmedic/en/home/kpa/aktuell-kpa/neuzulassungen-kpa.html].
Swissmedic authorized 5 herbal medicinal products in 2021, one of them being loose nettle leaves.

In fact, despite all the advantages of [NP](#np)s, the [NP](#np)-based parts of drug discovery are in decline, mainly because of the analytical challenges they pose, which will be detailed in Chapter @sec:anal.
To overcome these limitations, phytochemistry has essentially turned to other areas, detailed below.

### Botanical Drugs

Botanical drugs are defined by the [FDA](#fda) as: 

> «*intended for use in \[...\] humans, \[...\], which may include plant materials, algae, macroscopic fungi, or combinations thereof \[...and\] often have unique features, for example, complex mixtures, lack of a distinct active ingredient, and substantial prior human use.*» [@url:https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/center-drug-evaluation-and-research-cder/what-botanical-drug].

To date, there are two approved botanical drugs: sinecatechins (Veregen®) and crofelemer (Mytesi™) [@url:https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/center-drug-evaluation-and-research-cder/what-botanical-drug].

Sinecatechins is a purified fraction of the water extract of leaves from *Camellia sinensis* (L.) Kuntze (Theaceae) [@pmid:22328955].
It is indicated for the topical treatment of genital warts, and its mechanism of action is unknown [@pmid:22328955].
Catechins represent around 90% the weight of the extract, while Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, the most abundant catechin, represents over 55% of the weight.
Seven other catechins are mentioned, without mass percentage.
Chapter @sec:cascade will present new methodologies to try to deepen the knowledge about such type of extracts from both a qualitative and quantitative point of view.

The other [FDA](#fda) appproved botanical drug is crofelemer.
Crofelemer is a purified oligomeric proanthocyanidin isolated from the latex from *Croton lechleri* Müll.Arg. (Euphorbiaceae).
Euphorbiaceae (5th most chemically studied plant family, see Figure @fig:intro-1) are known to produce highly irritant latex.
Crofelemer is indicated for different types of diarrhea [@doi:10.2147/HIV.S30948].
As for Sinecatechins, multiple catechins are involved.

Because of their plurisubstantial essence, botanica drugs are more difficut to characterize than classical drugs.
Before adressing the anaytical challenges, other fields of applications of phytochemistry will be detailed.
Although drug-related areas remain important for phytochemistry, it is also applicable to other areas, as illustrated in the Figure @fig:intro-epithets.

![**Relative Enrichment of the Specific Epithets of Chemically Investigated Organisms.** The relative enrichment corresponds to the internal percentage of species sharing an epithet in the *Lotus initiative* over internal percentage of species sharing the same epithet among all known species in Wikidata. The 10 specific epithets with the highest relative changes are illlustrated.](images/intro-epithets.pdf "intro-epithets"){#fig:intro-epithets short-caption="Relative Enrichment of the Specific Epithets of Chemically Investigated Organisms" align="center" width="100%"}

Figure @fig:intro-epithets illustrates the under- or overrepresentation of specific epithets in the *Lotus initiative* [@doi:10.7554/eLife.70780].
Specific epithets are the second word of the scientific name of a species, following binomial nomenclature. 
For example, *`lutea`* (meaning yellow) is the specific epithet of *`Gentiana lutea`*.
The specific epithet is often an adjective, and refers to some morphological trait of the organism.
To produce Figure @fig:intro-epithets, all specific epithets of species present in Wikidata were collected [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.6873162] (Wikidata will be detailed later on) and compared to the ones of the *Lotus initiative*.
This led to almost 3,000,000 species.
Some basic statistics are available at <https://adafede.github.io/wd-taxon-names/>
The ten epithets which ratios changed the most were `melanoxylon`, `minuta`, `obscura`, `officinale`, `officinalis`, `sativa`, `sativus`, `similis`, `solanacea`, and `verum`.

bias color investigation 10.1038/s41477-021-00912-2

### Food & Beverages

Even before medicine, the main interaction between plants and humans is through food.

Solanaceae (potato, tomato, pepperoni), tobacco

Rutaceae, lemon, bergaptene photosensitizer 0.2% + Apiaceae

Apiaceae spices, carrots, gin

Rubiaceae, Coffea

`//TODO`{.red}.

### Perfumes & Cosmetics

Lamiaceae, Gemandrée Petit Chêne toxique

Latex Euphorbiaceae

(Toxicité) quinone  …(plus de test animaux) 

Essential Oils

Perfumes

`//TODO`{.red}.

### Plant Protection Products

Insecticide Azadirachta indica Meliaceae India traditional medicine

`//TODO`{.red}.

Finir sur les besoins d’analyse pour documenter la composition, établir le manque

\newpage