## Analytical Methods {#sec:anal}

`//TODO`{.red}.

### The *Detected Metabolome*

Only parts detected [@doi:10.1002/jssc.200900152]

number 2 [@doi:10.1111/j.1755-0998.2010.02854.x]

`//TODO`{.red}.

#### The *Colored Metabolome* (Photo Diode Array)

`//TODO`{.red}.

#### The *Charged Metabolome* (Mass Spectrometry)

GC reproducible

<!-- In the past years, MS has become the gold standard detection in many fields of application thanks to its high selectivity, great sensitivity and large applicability. For example, LC‐MS is now routinely used for the determination of analytes at very low concentrations in complex matrices, as an example in bioanalysis, food industry (multi‐residue pesticides analysis) and environmental analysis [46] -->

<!-- JO
2.3 Spectromètre de masse
Il est important pour un phytochimiste de pouvoir détecter et distinguer les composés d’un mélange.
L’une des solutions consiste à mesurer la masse des molécules présentes.
Il existe pour cela de nombreux appareils appellés spectromètres de masse utilisant des approches différentes. 
Mais tous fonctionnent selon le même principe.
Les composants de l’échantillon sont ionisés, focalisés et séparés selon leur masse puis dé- tectés.
L’ionisation est réalisée de façon différente selon la nature de l’échantillon et la nature des composés.
On peut ainsi analyser directement des solides avec des techniques telles que le Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization - Désorption et ionisation par laser assistée par une matrice (MALDI) ou le Direct Analysis in Real Time - Analyse directe en temps réel (DART), ce dernier permettant même d’analyser directement un échantillon solide (gélule, comprimé, fibre, partie de plante) sans préparation préalable, promettant à cette technique un avenir certain.
Mais pour l’instant, en chimie des SN, la spectrométrie de masse est surtout utilisée en tant que détecteur à la sortie d’un système chromatographique avec le plus souvent des sources Electro-Spray Ionisation - Ionisation par elecro-spray (ESI) ou Atmospheric-pressure chemical ionization - Ionisation chimique à pression atmosphérique (APCI), ou utilisée avec un composé purifié afin d’obtenir soit sa composition soit une signature avec des techniques comme l’Electronic ionizasion - Ionisation électronique (EI) 1 et la Fast Atom Bombardment - Bombardement par atomes rapides (FAB).
Concernant la séparation des composés selon leur masse, il existe de nombreuses techniques adaptées à différentes utilisations telles que les Ion Trap - Trappe à ions (IT), les Time Of Flight - Analyseur par temps de vol (TOF), les quadrupôles, la Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance - Analyseur à résonance cyclotronique d’ions (FTICR) ou les Orbitraps.
Leur utilisation va dépendre du type d’informations souhaitées par l’utilisateur, certains appareils n’ont pas une précision suffisante pour connaître la formule brute d’un composé, mais permettent en contre-partie d’étudier plus en détail la structure du composé.
Le spectromètre de masse utilisé pour les travaux de cette thèse est un spectromètre à source electro-spray et à trappe ionique (ESI-IT).
L’avantage de cet appareil est de pouvoir le coupler facilement à un flux liquide contenant les espèces à analyser grâce à la source ESI, adaptée aux stilbénoïdes, et de pouvoir réaliser des études de fragmentation des composés grâce à la trappe quadripolaire.
Un système inclus dans la trappe permet en effet, en injectant de l’hélium, de casser les ions présents et ainsi d’analyser ces fragments.
On peut répéter cela sur des ions issus d’une première fragmentation, on parle alors de MSn avec n le nombre de fragmentations successives.
L’autre intérêt de ce type d’appareil est de pouvoir former des ions négatifs et positifs, et de pouvoir alterner entre ces deux modes rapidement (200 ms) au cours d’une analyse.
1. Aussi utilisée dans les couplages de la chromatographie en phase gazeuse et la spectrométrie de masse 
Le lecteur pourra se référer à la présentation du fonctionnement de la masse utilisée lors de cette thèse dans l’annexe 14.10 page ix ainsi qu’aux ouvrages et documents suivants pour obtenir une description plus détaillée de cette technique (Poole, Cooke et Wilson 2000 ; Laprévote 2001 ; Flamini et Traldi 2010). Il trouvera en particulier, sur l’ensemble des techniques de spectrométrie de masse et leurs applications, plus d’informations dans l’ouvrage de Watson (Watson et Sparkman 2007). -->

<!-- 
Vincent
Since its first hyphenation to GC in 1959 [49], mass spectrometry has become one of the most widely used qualitative and quantitative detection technique in chromatography.
Its principle resides in the separation of ions in the gas phase according to their mass to charge ratio (m/z).
Therefore, a MS detector is composed of two distinct parts: i) the ionization source, where the ions in the gas phase are generated, and ii) the mass analyzer in which the separation of the ions occurs under high vacuum, thanks to the use of electric and magnetic fields.
There has been a constant evolution of MS ionization sources and analyzers over time. 
Several ionization techniques are nowadays available, such as electronic impact (EI), chemical ionization (CI), atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI), electrospray (ESI), atmospheric pressure photoionization (APPI) and matrix‐assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI).
The choice of the ionization method depends on the nature of the analytes and the chromatographic technique used upstream of the detection.
The atmospheric pressure ionization sources (i.e. ESI, APCI and APPI) are the most widely used in SFC and LC.
They are soft ionization techniques, which do not lead to fragmentation, unlike EI which is commonly used in GC‐MS.
ESI and APCI can be considered as complementary, as APCI is intended for the analysis of small molecules with low to intermediate polarity, whereas ESI aims at analyzing small to large molecules with intermediate to high polarity [51].
ESI is, nowadays, the most widely used ionization source within the liquid chromatographic community.
As an example, 80% of the LC‐MS analyses are performed using ESI [52].
The ionization process using ESI is represented in Figure 6.
It can be divided into three steps:
i) the formation of charged droplets at the end of the capillary, originating from the chromatographic separation, by applying a high negative or positive voltage
ii) the production of gas‐phase ions thanks to the solvent evaporation which leads to the shrinkage of the droplet followed by the Coulomb fission of these droplets, creating many smaller droplets, and
iii) the migration of gas‐phase ions to the MS analyzer thanks to the electric field [53].
The ionization yield in ESI, and consequently the method sensitivity, are highly dependent on the analytical conditions used in the chromatographic separation.
First, the flow rate is of great importance and has a direct impact on the size of the generated droplets and the spray stability [54].
At elevated flow rates (over 500 μL/min), the sensitivity is often compromised.
The flow rates used in UHPSFC are generally high, which could appear as an issue for hyphenation with MS.
However, this parameter is balanced by the fact that CO2 in the mobile phase evaporates directly in the source, and the actual flow directed to the MS source is only composed of the organic co‐solvent (and possibly a make‐up solvent added in the interface, see section I.2.2.). 
Secondly, the efficiency of the solvent evaporation in the source obviously depends on the nature of this solvent.
The more volatile it is, the easier the evaporation is, and consequently the shrinkage of the droplets, is. 
Finally, some additional parameters, such as the capillary voltage, the source temperature, the desolvation gas flow rate and temperature, inherent to the MS source, have to be tuned to maximize the ionization yield.
Contrary to ESI, the creation of the ions in APCI occurs in the gas phase [55].
Here, the vaporization of the chromatographic eluent is realized through the use of a nebulizing gas, generally nitrogen. The spray is then heated between 200 and 500°C in a vaporizer, to promote the desolvation (see Figure 7). The ionization happens by applying a high voltage to a needle, located at the exit of the nebulizer, provoking a Corona discharge [56]. The needle captures or releases electrons (depending if the applied voltage is positive or negative, respectively), which triggers a succession of gas‐phase reactions involving the nebulizing gas, the mobile phase constituents and the analytes, leading to the ionization of the analytes.
Compared to ESI, APCI presents several advantages, such as a lower susceptibility to matrix effects [51], and the compatibility with high mobile phase flow rates. It was historically the privileged technique of ionization for SFC, but has progressively been replaced by ESI because of its largest compatibility, especially for more polar analytes.
APPI is one of the most recent atmospheric pressure ionization technique [57]. The principle is quite similar to APCI. The difference resides in the fact that the succession of gas‐phase reactions is not provoked by electrons from the Corona discharge, but by photons emitted by a UV lamp (typically a krypton discharge lamp) [56]. An additional molecule, called dopant, is commonly added to enhance the ionization yield of the analyte, by acting as an intermediary between the photons and the analyte. To be photoionized, the substance selected as a dopant must possess an ionization energy lower than the photon energy emitted by the lamp (below 10 eV). Acetone, toluene, and anisole are the most commonly used dopants. APPI is not well adapted to the analysis of pharmaceutical compounds, and is more targeted to non‐polar analytes.

As previously mentioned, the purpose of the mass analyzer is to separate the different gas‐phase ions, transferred from the ionization source. Many different mass analyzers are currently available on the market, such as the quadrupole (Q), the ion trap (IT), the time of flight (TOF), the Orbitrap© and the Fourier‐transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR). Tandem mass spectrometers (i.e. combinations of mass analyzers) are also commercialized and widely used, namely the triple quadrupole (QqQ), quadrupole time‐of‐flight (QqTOF) and quadrupole ion trap (QTrap). The analyzers are generally characterized by their resolving power:
In equation (5), m is the mass of the ion and Δm is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the corresponding peak on the MS spectra. The mass analyzers are classified in two groups. The low‐ resolution mass analyzers have a revolving power below 10,000, and the high‐resolution mass analyzers higher than 10,000. Another important parameter of mass analyzers is the mass accuracy (given in ppm), which represents the trueness of the measurements (difference between the mass measured by the analyzer and the real mass).
The Q, QqQ and IT analyzers have a low resolution and are, consequently, unable to separate compounds with the same nominal mass. This type of analyzer is generally used for targeted analysis, possibly quantitative. On the other hand, the high‐resolution mass analyzers (TOF, Orbitrap and FTICR) are mainly used for untargeted analysis, in which the purpose is the structural identification of unknown analytes, thanks to the determination of the exact mass.
During this thesis work, only the Q and QqQ detectors were employed. Therefore, they will be discussed into more details. The features of the other mass analyzers are described in the book chapter in section I.2.3.
The first quadrupole analyzer was imagined by Paul and Steinwedel in 1953, but only introduced by Finnigan in 1968. It consists of 4 cylindrical or hyperbolic parallel metal rods. Each opposing rod pair is connected together electrically. A radio frequency (RF) alternating current associated to a direct current (DC) offset voltage are applied between one pair of rods and the other, creating different electrical fields between the rods according to the set RF and DC values [58]. The quadrupole can be considered as a mass filter, because, with certain values of RF and DC currents, only ions with a specific m/z are able to cross the electrical field and reach the detector. The other ions have unstable trajectories and collide with the rods, loose their charge and are not detected (see Figure 8). This permits selection of an ion with a particular m/z or allows the operator to scan for a range of m/z‐ values by continuously varying the applied voltage.
The quadrupole is able to operate in two different modes: i) the scan mode consists in scanning all the m/z ratios in a pre‐defined range, and ii) the selected ion monitoring (SIM) mode, for which only a few selected m/z are monitored. The sensitivity is better with the latter, as the background noise is reduced due to higher selectivity of the SIM mode. Another mode, called “ion guide”, can also be mentioned. All the ions are transferred through the quadrupole in such a configuration (only the RF current is applied in this case).
The first triple quadrupole was built by Yost and Enke in 1978, while the first commercial version of this instrument was available in 1982, by Finnigan and Sciex [59]. With the QqQ analyzer, three quadrupoles are installed in series. Only the first and third quadrupoles actually behave as quadrupoles. The second is an ion guide used as a collision cell. In this collision cell, an inert gas (generally argon) is introduced to create collision‐induced dissociation (CID) of the precursor ion selected by the first quadrupole. The generated fragments (product ions) are then analyzed in the third quadrupole (see Figure 9).
Like Q analyzers, QqQ can operate in different modes. The selected reaction monitoring (SRM) is the most widely used, especially for targeted analysis [60]. One specific precursor ion is selected in the first quadrupole, fragmented in the collision cell, and another specific fragment issued from the dissociation is monitored in the third quadrupole. This strategy gives a much higher selectivity to the detection and, consequently, a better sensitivity to the method, thanks to the reduction of the background noise. When this mode is applied to several transitions (several product ions from one or several precursor ions) within the same analysis, the designation “multiple reaction monitoring” (MRM) is employed. The other modes occur when at least one of the two active quadrupoles is in scan mode. When the third quadrupole is in scan mode, the mode is called “product ion scan” and all the fragments of a selected precursor ion are analyzed. It is used to obtain structural information or to assess the best SRM transition for a given analyte. When the first quadrupole is in scan mode, the mode is called “precursor ion scan”. It determines the different precursor ions generating the same specific fragment, to highlight possible affiliation to the same family of molecules [61,62]. Finally, the last mode is called “neutral loss scan” and is more scarcely used. In this mode, both quadrupoles are set in scan mode but shifted by a pre‐defined neutral mass, in order to highlight a neutral fragment common to several compounds [63].

[49] R.S. Gohlke, F.W. McLafferty, Early gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 4 (1993) 367–371.
[50] T. Taylor, Understanding Electron Ionization Processes for GC–MS, LCGC North America 33 (2015) 290.
[51] M. Holčapek, R. Jirásko, M. Lísa, Basic rules for the interpretation of atmospheric pressure ionization mass spectra of small molecules, J. Chromatogr. A 1217 (2010) 3908–3921.
[52] M.P. Balogh, Emerging technologies in the MS arsenal, LCGC North America 22 (2004) 1082‐1090.
[53] N.B. Cech, C.G. Enke, Practical implications of some recent studies in electrospray ionization fundamentals, Mass Spectrom. Rev. 20 (2001) 362–387.
[54] I. Manisali, D.D.Y. Chen, B.B. Schneider, Electrospray ionization source geometry for mass spectrometry: past, present, and future, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 25 (2006) 243–256.
[55] T.R. Covey, B.A. Thomson, B.B. Schneider, Atmospheric pressure ion sources, Mass Spectrom. Rev. 28 (2009) 870–897.
[56] P. Terrier, B. Desmazières, J. Tortajada, W. Buchmann, APCI/APPI for synthetic polymer analysis, Mass Spectrom. Rev. 30 (2011) 854‐874.
[57] I. Marchi, S. Rudaz, J. Veuthey, Atmospheric pressure photoionization for coupling liquid‐ chromatography to mass spectrometry: A review, Talanta. 78 (2009) 1–18.
[58] D.J. Douglas, Linear quadrupoles in mass spectrometry, Mass Spectrom. Rev. 28 (2009) 937–960.
[59] E. de Hoffmann, V. Stroobant, Mass Spectrometry, Principles and applications, Third edition, John Wiley & sons Ltd. (2007).
[60] L. Nováková, Challenges in the development of bioanalytical liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry method with emphasis on fast analysis, J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 25–37.
[61] M. Thevis, H. Geyer, U. Mareck, W. Schänzer, Screening for unknown synthetic steroids in human urine by liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry, J. Mass Spectrom. 40 (2005) 955–962.
[62] M. Mazzarino, S. Turi, F. Botrè, A screening method for the detection of synthetic glucocorticosteroids in human urine by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry based on class‐ characteristic fragmentation pathways, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 390 (2008) 1389–1402.
[63] Y.‐Q. Xia, M. Jemal, Phospholipids in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry bioanalysis: comparison of three tandem mass spectrometric techniques for monitoring plasma phospholipids, the effect of mobile phase composition on phospholipids elution and the association of phospholipids with matrix effects, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 23 (2009) 2125–2138.

8.4.1 Quadrupole Analyzer
A quadrupole analyzer uses a combination of radio frequency alter- nating current (AC) and direct current (DC) voltages as a mass filter, for separating ions. The quadrupole consists of four parallel rods. The positive DC voltage is applied on two opposite rods, and the same value of the negative DC voltage is applied on the remaining two rods. The AC is connected to all four rods. Combined DC and RF potentials on the quadrupole rods can be set to pass only a selected m/z ratio. All other ions do not have a stable trajectory through the quadrupole mass analyzer and will collide with the quadrupole rods, never reaching the detector.
The single quadrupole is certainly the simplest, cheapest, most robust, and ubiquitous mass analyzer in research and development laboratories, but it suffers from a limited sensitivity, resolving power and mass accuracy. The coupling of SFC with a single quadrupole device was quite common in the early days of SFC-MS (1980s and 1990s), since it was easily controlled by existing software and was easily adaptable to the sources and interfaces described in this chapter [37]. However, this hyphenation is only investigated by few research groups today [38], probably due to the limited selectivity of single quadrupole analyzers and the availability of superior tandem instruments.
8.4.2 Ion Trap Analyzer
On the market, there are two types of ion traps, namely spherical and linear ion traps. Both operate by storing ions in the trap and manipulating them by using DC and RF electrical fields in a series of timed events. Then, the RF and DC potentials can be scanned to eject successive m/z ratios from the trap into the detector. The main limita- tion of spherical ion traps is the space charge effect. Indeed, only a certain maximum number of ions can be stored in a given volume in a spherical ion trap, due to space charge constraints. This results in a loss of resolution with potential m/z shift. In comparison, linear ion traps have better ion storage capacity.
The ion trap analyzer is extremely compact. It is able to do multi- stage mass spectrometry and offers a relatively high sensitivity. However, its quantitative performance and dynamic range are rela- tively poor and ion trap analyzers remain more difficult to operate than a quadrupole, due to the numerous possible settings (excitation, trapping, and detection conditions). Ion traps were used in the past for SFC-MS operation [39,40], but today they are often replaced by triple quadrupole instruments, which are faster and more sensitive.

8.4.3 Time-of-Flight Analyzer
A TOF analyzer measures the time spent by ions of different masses to move from the ionization source to the detector. There are three main features that explain the high mass accuracy and resolving power achieved with TOF analyzers, namely the reflectron, delayed extraction, and orthogonal acceleration [41,42]. The reflectron (ion mir- ror) focuses ions with identical m/z ratio, but different kinetic energies, thus improving resolving power. A short delay is applied to further reduce kinetic energy spread of individual ions, which is referred to as delayed extraction of ions. The orthogonal acceleration is certainly the best approach to transform a continuous ion beam produced by ESI, APCI, or APPI into a pulsed beam, directly compatible with TOF analyzers.
The inherent characteristics of TOF/MS are its high sensitivity in scan mode (all ions are detected), theoretically unlimited mass range as well as high acquisition speed (the duty cycle of modern instruments can attain 100 Hz). In addition, high-end TOF instruments afford resolv- ing power of 40,000􏱜60,000 and mass accuracies below 2 ppm. The only drawback to TOF analyzers is its limited dynamic range and quan- titative performance. TOF analyzers have been employed in SFC-MS [32,43], but tend to be replaced today by QqTOF/MS.

8.4.4 Orbitrap Analyzer
The orbitrap is the most recent mass analyzer, developed by Makarov in 2000 [44,45] and commercialized in 2005. In few words, the orbitrap mass analyzer operates by radially trapping ions around a central electrode. This mass analyzer only uses electrostatic fields (DC) to confine and analyze ions. The m/z values are finally measured from the frequency of harmonic oscillations of ions, along the axis of the elec- tric field.
The orbitrap analyzer offers very high resolving power in the range 100,000􏱜240,000, and excellent mass accuracy below 1 ppm. In addition, it possesses a high space charge capacity which makes this instrument suitable for tackling the most difficult analytical problems. However, this instrument remains quite expensive and difficult to use, at least for beginners. Another drawback of orbitrap analyzers is its low acquisition rate, compared to quadrupole and TOF instruments, which makes them incompatible (at least for the first generation) with the narrow peaks produced in UHPSFC. Up to now, it has only been used in a few SFC- MS applications [46􏱜48], dealing with the determination of pesticides, oil sands profiling, and lipidomics.

8.4.5 Tandem Mass Analyzers
The MS/MS uses two stages of analyzers, to examine selectively the fragmentation of isolated ions. The coupling of two analyzers in series (also known as tandem MS) can be done with the same analyzer (QqQ) or two different analyzers (QqTOF), which are known as hybrid instru- ments. For dissociation experiments, the most common activation method is collision induced dissociation (CID), where an inert gas is introduced into a collision cell where low energy (10􏱜100 eV) and colli- sions occur between the precursor ion and the molecules of inert gas.
Today, the most widely used MS/MS instrument for trace analysis in complicated matrices is the triple quadrupole (QqQ), where the first and third quadrupoles are mass selective devices and the second serves as a collision cell. The QqQ is particularly useful for quantitative analy- sis, due to its ability to work in the highly selective single reaction mon- itoring (SRM) mode. In the SRM mode, the sensitivity is excellent, and very high acquisition rates (down to ,1ms per transition) can be reached for quantitative analysis of complex multicomponent mixtures.
An alternative to QqQ is the QqTOF where the third quadrupole is replaced with a TOF analyzer. One of the main advantage of QqTOF instruments over QqQ is the high resolving power of TOF, typically in the range 20,000􏱜40,000. As a result, interfering peaks from ions having the same nominal mass can be resolved, thus improving the signal-to- noise ratio.
Tandem mass analyzers (QqQ and QqTOF) have become more popu- lar in recent years and are the most widely used instruments for SFC-MS operation today [49􏱜54].

[37] Pinkston JD, Wen D, Morand KL, Tirey DA, Stanton DT. Comparison of LC/MS and SFC/MS for screening of a large and diverse library of pharmaceutically relevant compounds. Anal Chem 2006;78(21):7467􏱜72.
[38] Spaggiari D, Mehl F, Desfontaine V, Grand-Guillaume Perrenoud A, Fekete S, Rudaz S, et al. Comparison of liquid chromatography and supercritical fluid chromatography coupled to benchtop single quadrupole mass spectrometer for in vitro CYP-mediated metabolism assay. J Chromatogr A 2014;1371:244􏱜56.
[39] Morgan DG, Harbol KL, Kitrinos Jr NP. Optimization of a supercritical fluid chromatograph-atmospheric chemical ionization mass spectrometer interface using an ion trap and two quadrupole mass spectrometers. J Chromatogr A 1998;800: 39􏱜49.
[40] Xu X, Roman JM, Veenstra TD, Van Anda J, Ziegler RG, Issaq HJ. Analysis of fifteen estrogen metabolites using packed column supercritical fluid chromatography2mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2006;78(5):1553􏱜8.
[41] Bristow AWT. Accurate mass measurement for the determination of elemental formula—a tutorial. Mass Spectrom Rev 2006;25(1):99􏱜111.
[42] Jiwan JLH, Wallemacq P, He ́rent MF. HPLC-high resolution mass spectrometry in clinical laboratory? Clin Biochem 2011;44(1):136􏱜47.
[43] Klink D, Schmitz J. SFC-APLI-(TOF)MS: hyphenation of supercritical fluid chroma- tography to atmospheric pressure laser ionization mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2016;88:1058􏱜64.
[44] Makarov A. Electrostatic axially harmonic orbital trapping: a high-performance tech- nique of mass analysis. Anal Chem 2000;72(6):1156􏱜62.
[45] Hardman M, Makarov A. Interfacing the orbitrap mass analyzer to an electrospray ion source. Anal Chem 2003;75(7):1699􏱜705.
[46] Pereira AS, Martin JW. Exploring the complexity of oil sands process-affected water by high efficiency supercritical fluid chromatography/orbitrap mass spectrometry. Rapid Comm Mass Spec 2015;29(8):735􏱜44.
[47] Yamada T, Uchikata T, Sakamoto S, Yokoi Y, Nishiumi S, Yoshida M, et al. Supercritical fluid chromatography/Orbitrap mass spectrometry based lipidomics platform coupled with automated lipid identification software for accurate lipid profiling. J Chromatogr A 2013;1301:237􏱜42.
[48] Ishibashi M, Izumi Y, Sakai M, Ando T, Fukusaki E, Bamba T. High-throughput simultaneous analysis of pesticides by supercritical fluid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry. J Agric Food Chem 2015;63(18):4457􏱜63.
[49] Nova ́ kova ́ L, Grand-Guillaume Perrenoud A, Nicoli R, Saugy M, Veuthey JL, Guillarme D. UHPSFC-MS/MS for screening of doping agents. I: investigation of mobile phase and MS conditions. Anal Chim Acta 2015;853:637􏱜46.
[50] Nova ́ kova ́ L, Rentsch M, Grand-Guillaume Perrenoud A, Nicoli R, Saugy M, Veuthey JL, et al. UHPSFC-MS/MS for screening of doping agents. II: analysis of biological samples. Anal Chim Acta 2015;853:647􏱜59.
[51] Nova ́kova ́ L, Desfontaine V, Ponzetto F, Nicoli R, Saugy M, Veuthey JL, et al. Fast and sensitive supercritical fluid chromatography—tandem mass spectrometry multi- class screening method for the determination of doping agents in urine. Anal Chim Acta 2016;915:102􏱜10.
[52] Desfontaine V, Nova ́kova ́ L, Ponzetto F, Nicoli R, Saugy M, Veuthey JL, et al. Liquid chromatography and supercritical fluid chromatography as alternative techniques to gas chromatography for the rapid screening of anabolic agents in urine. J Chromatogr A 2016;1451:145􏱜55.
[53] Hedrick J, VanAnda J, Brand T. Qualitative analysis of fish oil triglycerides with supercritical fluid chromatography and Q-TOF MS. Agilent Appl Note 2014; 5991􏱜5183EN.
[54] Grand-Guillaume Perrenoud A, Guillarme D, Veuthey JL, Barron D, Moco S. Ultra- high performance supercritical fluid chromatography coupled with quadrupole- time-of-flight mass spectrometry as a performing tool for bioactive analysis. J Chromatogr A 2016;1450:101􏱜11. -->


<!-- LUCA
Several detectors can be hyphenated to SFC, such as UV or ELSD
However, MS has recently captured the interest of the majority of research groups. Due to its unparalleled applicability range, as well as high selectivity and elevated sensitivity, MS represents the gold standard detector in numerous laboratories (28,29).
Its coupling to chromatographic technique such as GC or, more importantly, LC has been the subject of different studies.
Nowadays LC-MS represent the gold standard in metabolomics, anti-doping laboratories, food industry and for environmental analyses (28,30,31).
Many typologies of MS ionization sources are available nowadays.
Ionization chambers can work either under vacuum conditions, such as in the case of chemical ionization (CI) or electron impact (EI), or under atmospheric pressure (atmospheric pressure ionization, or API).
The development and subsequent use of API sources, such as electrospray (ESI), atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) and atmospheric pressure photo-ionization (APPI), allowed the coupling of separation techniques such as LC and, lately, SFC to MS systems.
More specifically, ESI sources have proven to be decisive as they ensure the ionization and desolvation of a large spectrum of compounds, from small to large molecules, with intermediate to relatively low polarities.
ESI can be divided into three main phases (Figure 6).
Initially, the mobile phase stream coming from the chromatographic system needs to be reduced into droplets released from the Taylor cone at the end of the capillary, with the aid of a nebulization gas as well as the use of high temperatures.
These droplets will acquire a charge that can be either positive or negative, according to the applied capillary voltage.
Subsequently, the charged droplets will undergo a reduction in their size, which would increase exponentially the ionic repulsion phenomenon as an excess of charges with the same polarity will accumulate on the surface of the droplets.
This leads to Coulomb fission of the larger droplets into smaller ones, igniting a chain of reactions which would lead, eventually, to the creation of gas-phase ions (32).
Finally, the ions in gas-phase will enter into the MS analyzer (under vacuum region), leading to their separation and detection.
Once ions are passed in their gaseous state and have acquired a charge, they will be transferred in the mass analyzer of the MS instrument.
Mass analyzers are fundamental, since their role is to guarantee the discrimination between the different ions that have been previously generated in the MS ionization source.
Mass analyzers are classified according to their resolution power, following equation 3:
where m is the ion’s mass and Dm is the resolution or full width at half maximum (FWHM).
Using equation 2, it has been possible to classify mass analyzers in two main groups: those with a resolution power < 10 000, called low-resolution mass analyzers, and those with a resolution power > 10 000 (high-resolution mass analyzers).
In the first group quadrupole (Q), and ion trap (IT) analyzers are present.
These are not capable to discriminate ions with the same nominal mass, due to the unit resolution they offer.
In compensation, they are able to provide excellent performance in the context of targeted analyses, especially when quantification is needed.
High resolution mass analyzers, such as time-of-flight (TOF) or Orbitrap©, are capable in separating ions down to 0.001 atomic mass unit of difference and are, therefore, mainly used in untargeted analyses to obtain information regarding the structure of unknown analytes.
In this thesis work, single quadrupole, triple quadrupole and time-of-flight analyzers have been employed. 

I.3.3 Matrix effect
Application involving SFC-MS have started to greatly increase with the development of the latest generation of SFC-MS interfaces.
Among those, the analysis of biological matrices has attracted the attention of researchers. Indeed, the possibility to benefit from the complementarity given by SFC in the chromatographic separation, in combination with the typical detection range of MS was seen by many as an interesting alternative to LC-MS.
However, when compounds present in complex matrices are analyzed with MS, a phenomenon called matrix effect (ME) starts to arise.
Matrix effect has been defined as the alteration of the ionization process due to the presence of co-eluting substances generally invisible in chromatograms (36).
ME has been known for several years in LC-MS, with the first example described by Tang and Kebarle in 1993 (37).
Two ME types have been identified so far: ion suppression, in which the signal intensity of the desired ion present in the matrix is lower than the signal generated by the same analyte as a standard, both at identical concentration levels.
The second ME phenomenon is ion enhancement, in which an increase of the signal intensities can be observed, in opposition to ion suppression.
Although almost 30 years have passed, there is no clear theory that can fully explain how ME actually occurs.
The main hypothesis states that ME is due to a competition phenomenon between non-volatile matrix components and the ions of interest at the droplet surface for their subsequent transfer in the gaseous state and, thus, entrance in the MS analyzer.
However, while this hypothesis
can be useful in understanding ion suppression, it does not correlate with the ion enhancement phenomenon.
Several strategies have been developed to provide an estimation of the ME generated during the analysis.
One of the most common approach was introduced by Matuszewski et al. (38), in which the ratio between the peak area of one analyte spiked after the extraction procedure applied on the biological matrix over the peak area of the same analyte, at the same concentration, in neat solution is calculated.
ME is, then, obtained using the following equation 4:
As previously mentioned, ME is due to the coelution phenomenon of the desired analyte with substances present in the tested biological matrix.
As the latter can interact with the stationary phase, it is expected that the choice of the chromatographic technique can impact the level of ME generated within the analysis, thus reducing its extent.
SFC, therefore, can provide a quite different ME profile compared to that of RPLC and HILIC, due to its orthogonality and separation complementarity. 
28. Aszyk J, Byliński H, Namieśnik J, Kot-Wasik A. Main strategies, analytical trends and challenges in LC-MS and ambient mass spectrometry–based metabolomics. TrAC Trends Anal Chem. 2018 Nov 1;108:278–95.
29. Abushareeda W, Lyris E, Kraiem S, Wahaibi AA, Alyazidi S, Dbes N, et al. Gas chromatographic quadrupole time-of-flight full scan high resolution mass spectrometric screening of human urine in antidoping analysis. J Chromatogr B. 2017 Sep 15;1063:74–83.
30. Abushareeda W, Vonaparti A, Saad KA, Almansoori M, Meloug M, Saleh A, et al. High resolution full scan liquid chromatography mass spectrometry comprehensive screening in sports antidoping urine analysis. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2018 Mar 20;151:10–24.
31. Bieber S, Greco G, Grosse S, Letzel T. RPLC-HILIC and SFC with Mass Spectrometry: Polarity-Extended Organic Molecule Screening in Environmental (Water) Samples. Anal Chem. 2017 Aug 1;89(15):7907–14.
32. Konermann L, Ahadi E, Rodriguez AD, Vahidi S. Unraveling the Mechanism of Electrospray Ionization. Anal Chem. 2013 Jan 2;85(1):2–9.
33. Banerjee S, Mazumdar S. Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry: A Technique to Access the Information beyond the Molecular Weight of the Analyte. Wood TD, editor. Int J Anal Chem. 2012 Mar 12;2012:282574.
34. Losacco GL, Veuthey J-L, Guillarme D. Supercritical fluid chromatography – Mass spectrometry: Recent evolution and current trends. TrAC Trends Anal Chem. 2019 Sep 1;118:731–8.
35. Guillarme D, Desfontaine V, Heinisch S, Veuthey J-L. What are the current solutions for interfacing supercritical fluid chromatography and mass spectrometry? J Chromatogr B. 2018 Apr 15;1083:160–70.
36. Taylor PJ. Matrix effects: the Achilles heel of quantitative high-performance liquid chromatography–electrospray–tandem mass spectrometry. LC Mass Spectrom Recent Dev Clin Chem. 2005 Apr 1;38(4):328–34.
37. Tang Liang, Kebarle Paul. Dependence of ion intensity in electrospray mass spectrometry on the concentration of the analytes in the electrosprayed solution. Anal Chem. 1993 Dec 15;65(24):3654–68.
38. Matuszewski BK, Constanzer ML, Chavez-Eng CM. Strategies for the Assessment of Matrix Effect in Quantitative Bioanalytical Methods Based on HPLC−MS/MS. Anal Chem. 2003 Jul 1;75(13):3019–30.
-->

<!-- ADLIN
1.6.2.3 LC-MS platforms for metabolite fingerprint and profiling
The complex nature of plants compositions makes it currently impossible for a single technique to detect most groups of metabolites.
Thus, besides simple methods such as HPTLC or HPLC- UV fingerprints, other robust techniques (i.e. LC-MS, NMR) are often performed to increase analytical certainty in obtaining a relatively complete picture of a herbal product (Liang et al., 2004; Vermaak et al., 2010; H. Yang et al., 2010).
While metabolite fingerprinting and profiling is sometimes used interchangeably in the literature, Fiehn (2001) clearly separates these two concepts.
Metabolite fingerprinting consist of rapid classification of samples, in which extensive metabolite identification and quantitation are generally not used.
Instead, this method compare patterns or ‘fingerprint’ of metabolites that change in a given biological system.
Metabolite profiling emphasized on analysis of a large group of metabolites that involves extensive metabolite identification (Fiehn, 2001).
LC-MS platform has been used extensively for more than two decades for the metabolites fingerprint/profiling of plant extracts (Griffiths, 2009).
The LC has an advantage as a versatile technique for direct separation of crude extracts from plants without the need for extensive sample preparation, as with derivatization of samples in GC-MS analysis (Lopes et al., 2017; Kuehnbaum & Britz-McKibbin, 2013).
Over the past 15 years, LC methods have evolved from HPLC towards very efficient Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) platform.
UHPLC uses a smaller diameter of particles (sub 2 μm) within the column compare to >3 μm for HPLC (Theodoridis et al., 2011a; Wolfender et al., 2015a).
In theory, lower particle size induces an increase in optimal velocity, due to improved mass transfer and thus permits dramatic increases in separation power and sensitivity (McGuffin, 2004).
This is, however, at the expense of high pressure that requires dedicated systems that withstand >400 bar such as the UHPLC (Wolfender et al., 2015a).
For UHPLC separation, majority of metabolite profiles are acquired on reversed-phase (RP) C18 but diverse chemistry phases such as HILIC may improve selectivity for highly polar metabolites including for sulphur-containing metabolites, amino acids, amino sugars, polar lipids, organic acids, oligosaccharides, glycosides, nucleotides and phosphorylated metabolites (Rampler et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2016; Wolfender et al., 2015a).
A standard UHPLC method usually employs ultra-fast separations using gradient mobile phase for high-throughput analysis, with an analysis time of less than 5 min, which has been effectively applied for complex natural product (NP) extracts (Bertrand et al., 2013; Guillarme et al., 2010; Mehl et al., 2014).
On the other hand, Liquid chromatography-high resolution MS (LC-HRMS) profiling with higher efficiency for deep metabolome analysis can also be obtained on long UHPLC columns (e.g. 150 mm column length) with long gradient time (Eugster et al., 2012).
The main disadvantage of using a long column with a small particle size is the difficulties in achieving an optimal flowrate due to an increase in backpressure.
This issue can be compensated by performing the separation at high temperature. Previous studies have demonstrated that high-temperature separation for NP extracts generated similar peak capacities (i.e. defined as the number of peaks that can be separated within a retention window) to those obtained at room temperature, but with reduced analysis time (Bertrand et al., 2013; Grata et al., 2009).
MS as a detection tool provides high sensitivity detection for most secondary metabolites, and structural information such as accurate mass, isotopic distribution, molecular formula (MF) and MS/MS fragmentation data, which altogether assist in putative metabolites identification (Perrenoud et al., 2016; Periat et al., 2017). The mass spectrometry instrumentation consists of several components: ion source, analyser and detector system (Steinmann & Ganzera, 2011). The most common ion source used for NP extracts is electrospray ionisation (ESI), and both positive and negative ion modes are often acquired to attain the highest number of ionised constitutes (Boccard et al., 2010; Wolfender et al., 2015a). For HRMS analysis, mass analyser such as orbital ion trap (Orbitrap) and quadrupoles/time-of-flight (QTof), offers different specifications of accuracy, resolution, acquisition speed and dynamic range and each of these instrumental design influences the product ion masses and ion abundances in MS/MS spectra (Kind et al., 2018). HRMS separation involves the accurate molecular weight measurement of metabolite to several decimal points as opposed to a low-resolution MS (i.e. ion-trap, single quad MS), which measures only to the near-atomic mass unit. Having HRMS is key for metabolite identification because it improves mass accuracy, which consecutively reduces the number of candidate elemental formula to a single confident assignment for annotations of metabolites (Wolfender et al., 2015a).
A mass analyser (e.g. QTof and Orbitrap) measures the mass to charge ratio (m/z) values of an ion eluting from the LC and outputs the ions to the detector, which records the relative abundance of each ion type and converts them into electrical signals (Steinmann & Ganzera, 2011). The output signal for complex samples such as crude natural extracts yields huge information, sometimes in thousands of mass features (m/z) (Wolfender et al., 2015a). These features may appear as different molecular ion species of protonated or deprotonated molecules ([M+H]+, [M−H]−), single or multiple adducts (e.g. [M+Na]+, [M+H+CH3CN] for typical acetonitrile-water gradient) and in-source fragments and dimers (Abrank ́o et al., 2011; Kind et al., 2018; Wolfender et al., 2015a).
Besides measuring the m/z, MS can be used to fragment or break apart a metabolite. This information can be used to elucidate the structural connectivity of unknown compounds or to confirm compound identification by measuring the precursor and fragment mass (Demarque et al., 2016). Mass spectrometry uses collision-induced dissociation (CID) to fragment ions with relatively low energies (e.g. QToF) or higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) (e.g. Orbitrap) (Zubarev & Makarov, 2013). Fundamentally, when a metabolite hit the inert gas of argon or nitrogen, energy is transferred causing bonds to be broken. The strength of these bonds are not equal and other adjacent groups or atoms affect the energy needed to break these bonds. Therefore this results in several fragment ions (or product ions) with different intensities. A fragment ion may be less intense when more energy is needed to break the bonds so it occurs less often. Depending on the type of MS, MS/MS fragmentation can be obtained through several experiments. When multi-stage mass spectra (MSn) approach is used, ions are specifically selected for sequential fragmentation, resulting in more detailed fragmentation pathways and in turn provide more structural information (Wolfender et al., 2015b). On the other hand, a faster approach to metabolite annotation is using the automated data acquisition of MS/MS that include data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data- independent acquisition (DIA) (see section 1.6.2.4). -->

<!-- ZDOUC
Microbial extracts are complex matrices, containing primary and secondary metabolites, media components and possibly, impurities from the extraction process.
Therefore, extract analysis requires efficient analytical separation and detection techniques. In recent years, high pressure liquid chromatography, coupled to mass spectrometry (hereby referred to as LC-MS), has become a popular method due to is sensitivity, accurateness and rapidness.
It allows to characterize even minor constituents of an extract, based on exact mass, adduct formation and tandem mass (MS2, MS/MS or MS2) fragmentation pattern. [96]
LC-MS can be used for the high- throughput chemical profiling of extracts, enabling the systematic detection of contained metabolites.
The comprehensive identification and quantification of all low-molecular weight metabolites present in a biological system is known as metabolomics. [97,98]
LC-MS-based metabolomic technologies have been widely applied in the field of natural products. Targeted metabolomics focuses on a pre- defined set of metabolites, while untargeted metabolomics attempts to identify all metabolites in a biological sample, without a priori knowledge. Identification initiates usually on comparisons of the spectroscopic or spectrometric characteristics of metabolites, such as NMR or tandem mass spectra, against databases of experimental data, a method also known as dereplication. [96] Originally defined as “a process of quickly identifying known chemotypes”, [99] dereplication differentiates known from unknown metabolites. In recent years, this process has evolved significantly and will be discussed in greater extent in chapter 2. [100]
Systematic LC-MS analysis of complex extracts generates large quantities of raw data, which are usually processed using computational metabolomics tools. Among the various methods, tools integrating MS2 fragmentation spectra have become increasingly popular. MS2 spectra result from the collision-induced fragmentation of the parent ion and act as reproducible molecular fingerprint. Due to common fragmentation pathways, similar molecules usually yield similar MS2 spectra. Vice versa, similar MS2 spectra can indicate related molecules. [101] Still, different types of mass spectrometers can lead to differences in fragmentation pattern, which limits comparison of data obtained on different instruments. [102]
Based on the observation that similar MS2 fragmentations can indicate structural relatedness, an approach known as molecular networking has been developed. Here, the pairwise similarities between all MS2 fragmentation spectra in a dataset are calculated. Molecules with highly similar fragmentation spectra are assumed to be related and grouped into molecule clusters, also known as molecular families. Such clusters are networks (= graphs), in which compounds are represented as nodes, with links between them indicating relatedness. This allows to visually correlate the chemistry detected in a dataset. Compounds can also be singletons, if their fragmentation spectra are sufficiently different from any other compound. [101,103] To facilitate exploratory data analysis, molecular networking was developed into the Global Natural Product Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) web infrastructure, which automatizes molecular networking of user uploaded MS2 data. Users can map metadata, such as bioactivity or phylogenetic information, on the molecular network, allowing to prioritize samples and pursue mass-spectrometry based isolation of the detected metabolites. [104] Further, GNPS allows for automated annotation against a public library containing MS2 fragmentation spectra of standards. [105]
Another approach, called topic modeling, considers both fragments and neutral losses, occurring during MS2 fragmentation. Neutral losses contain additional information and may correspond to functional groups, such as glycosyl moieties, which do not appear as ions in tandem mass fragmentation. Using data mining, topic modeling identifies frequently occurring subsets of fragmentation spectra, so-called “mass motifs”, which may indicate common substructures of metabolites. Therefore, topic modeling can identify similarities between compounds that would not have been noticed in molecular networking. This approach has been developed into the MS2LDA-platform, where user can upload data and calculate similarity networks based on topic modeling. [106,107]
Metabolomics is an interdisciplinary field, combining a multitude of different approaches, including chemical analysis, multivariate statistics and systems biology. [96] However, to reach its full potential, metabolomic and genomic datasets have to be connected and interpreted together. Recently, the iOMEGA Paired Omics Data Platform has been initiated to provide infrastructure for the standardized linking of existing and novel genomic and metabolomic data, as well as to serve as a centralized database for paired datasets. An example for a paired-omics workflow is DeepRiPP, which was published during the writing of this thesis. DeepRiPP automatically detects RiPP BGCs in genomic data, scores them for their putative novelty and links them to compounds, detected in a corresponding metabolomics mass spectrometry dataset. [108] While such automated workflows still have to prove their value, they represent an exciting glance in the future of natural product discovery. -->

multiple ionization [@doi:10.1021/ac701982e]

`//TODO`{.red}.

The Orbitrap: A new mass spectrometer [@doi:10.1002/jms.856]

##### The *Fragmented Metabolome* (Tandem Mass Spectrometry)

`//TODO`{.red}.

<!-- THEO
1.3.2.2. Metabolite profiling of natural extracts using liquid chromatography coupled with multiple detectors
The first step to obtain a preliminary view of the chemical composition and complexity of the bioactive extract is the acquisition of its chromatographic metabolite profile. This is usually performed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipped with single or multiple detectors [407, 408]. Ultraviolet (UV) and mass spectrometry (MS) detectors are two qualitative detectors commonly used for the analysis of natural products [409]. MS is considered as a universal and sensitive detector which provide a comprehensive coverage of most metabolites when both positive and negative modes are combined. However, UV and MS provide little information on the amount of metabolites in a natural matrix. In this regard, the universal evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) [410] or charged aerosol detector (CAD) [411] are often used for the detection of non-UV-absorbing metabolites in order to provide semi-quantitative information [409]. Thus, these detectors can be hyphenated as LC-UV- ELSD/CAD-MS to detect possibly all metabolites from qualitative and semi-quantitative manner and provide a rational overview of the composition of the bioactive extract and the proportion of its analytes.
As mentioned above, another important aspect is the obtention of early structural information of the metabolites within the extracts. For this, UV-photodiode array (PDA) detector gives useful spectral data on metabolites exhibiting characteristic chromophores that may be typical of certain classes of compounds (e.g. flavonoids). In addition, on state-of-the-art MS detectors, the high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HRMS/MS) provides essential spectral information for the annotation of known metabolites and for putative structural assignment of possible unknowns in complex matrices [412].
This approach could be ideal for unambiguous identification if it could be coupled with experimental spectral databases. These databases are unfortunately not available and, especially in MS, are highly dependent on the platform used. To overcome this limitation, recent tools have been developed for the generation of in silico fragmentation database and for their comparison of experimental MS/MS spectra [413, 414]. This technique is considered as a keystone for the identification of metabolites from complex natural extracts [415-418]. Therefore, and where possible in the context of this thesis (chapters 2.1, 2.2., 4), dereplication of bioactive extracts was performed in parallel to the bioactivity- guided fractionation in order to provide additional chemical information on their metabolites (Fig. 16C.bis). Thus, LC-PDA-HRMS/MS provide complementary, crucial and structural information for the dereplication and putative annotation of most metabolites (Fig. 16D).
These analyses are primarily performed on reverse phase liquid chromatography which is suitable for the detection of polar and medium-polar metabolites. For apolar extracts, the stationary phase must be adapted for efficient separation of the metabolites. HPLC could be used to perform normal phase analysis of apolar extracts provided that the LC system can withstand the use of apolar solvents such as hexane and ethyl acetate. Normal phase chromatography is usually well suited for the separation of apolar metabolites but, due to the nature of the solvents used, is inappropriate for MS detection, rendering dereplication more complex than for polar metabolites in reverse phase. Supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) [419], gas chromatography (GC) [420] or ultra-performance convergence chromatography (UPC2, Waters) [421] coupled with MS represent complementary technique for the detection of such metabolites.
Normal phase HPLC has been extensively used in this thesis for the detection of apolar metabolites (chapters 5, 6) as well as GC-MS for the identification of volatile compounds (chapter 6). -->

#### The *Semi-quantified Metabolome*

##### Evaporative Light Scattering Detector

`//TODO`{.red}.

Universal quantification of structurally diverse natural products using an evaporative light scattering detector [@doi:10.1021/np300034c]

Development and validation of an analytical method based on HPLC- ELSD for the simultaneous determination of rosmarinic acid, carnosol, carnosic acid, oleanolic acid and ursolic acid in rosemary [@doi:10.3390/molecules24020323 ]

##### Charged Aerosol Detector

`//TODO`{.red}.

Application of high-performance liquid chromatography with charged aerosol detection (LC–CAD) for unified quantification of synthetic cannabinoids in herbal blends and comparison with quantitative NMR results [@doi:10.1007/s11419-017-0392-7]

Seeking universal detectors for analytical characterizations. [@doi:10.1016/j.jpba.2018.09.029]

Universal response model for a corona charged aerosol detector [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2010.09.056]

Comparison of UV and charged aerosol detection approach in pharmaceutical analysis of statins [@doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2008.12.057]

Comparison between evaporative light scattering detection and charged aerosol detection for the analysis of saikosaponins [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2010.04.047]

Comparison of the response of four aerosol detectors used with ultra high pressure liquid chromatograph [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2011.01.062]

##### Nuclear Magnetic Resonance & Other Spectroscopic Methods

<!-- Jo
2.4 Spectrométrie RMN
La RMN est un phénomène ayant lieu quand un noyau atomique, de spin 1 non nul, est placé dans un champ magnétique, champ terrestre y compris, et soumis à une radia- tion électromagnétique. En effet, un noyau de spin non nul dans un champ magnétique est doté d’un moment magnétique propre pouvant interagir avec ces radiations.
L’étude de l’interaction de ce moment avec la radiation, au moyen de séquences d’im- pulsions spécifiques, permet d’obtenir des informations sur l’environnement chimique de ce noyau, ce qui inclus son voisinage d’un point de vue liaison chimique, mais aussi son voisinage spatial.
On peut ainsi, comme dans l’exemple de la figure 2.5, avoir une indication de la na- ture des groupements chimiques ainsi qu’une indication sur la façon dont ces groupe- ments sont liés.
Le spectre proton, donne des informations sur chaque groupement à l’aide de 3 pa- ramètres :
– le déplacement chimique, (δ sur la figure) qui correspond à l’influence de l’envi- ronnement du groupement sur sa fréquence de résonnance
– l’aire du signal correspondant à ce groupement (A sur la figure), qui est propor- tionnelle au nombre de noyaux
– le motif de couplage et sa ou ses constantes de couplage (J sur la figure). Un pro- ton situé à 3 liaisons covalentes d’un autre proton aura un motif en doublet et la constante de couplage dépendra entre autres de l’orientation spatiale de l’un par rapport à l’autre. Dans le cas de l’éthanol présenté dans la figure, les protons du groupement CH3 forment un triplet (les aires de chaque pic suivant le motif 1 : 2 : 1) en raison de leur proximité avec le groupement CH2. Ce même grou- pement CH2 de par sa proximité avec le CH3 formera lui un quadruplet (avec les aires des composants suivant le motif 1 : 3 : 3 : 1). Ce phénomène est dû à l’in- teraction entre les spins de chacun des groupements. On appelle cela l’interaction Spin-Spin, elle devient de plus en plus faible avec le nombre de liaisons séparant les groupements considérés.
Les séquences permettant d’obtenir les spectres carbone contiennent en général ce que l’on appelle un motif de découplage, permettant de simplifier le spectre obtenu en supprimant les couplages Spin-Spin. On obtient alors qu’un seul pic par carbone, faci- litant la lecture et la différenciation entre des signaux souvent proches. Le carbone 12, isotope majeur du carbone a un spin nul, on ne peut donc pas obtenir de spectre à partir de lui. Cependant, le carbone 13, dont l’abondance naturelle moyenne est de 1 % dans le carbone sur terre le permet. Mais cette faible abondance réduit d’autant la sensibilité dans les expériences faisant intervenir le carbone directement. C’est d’ailleurs l’autre intérêt du découplage ; puisqu’il permet d’augmenter l’intensité du signal du carbone considéré. Par ailleurs, d’un point de vue plus théorique, la spectrométrie RMN est ba- sée sur l’étude des différences énergétiques entre les états stables et les états excités, or cette différence d’énergie est liée à une autre propriété des noyaux nommée rapport gyromagnétique 1. Or, le carbone a un rapport gyromagnétique d’environ le quart de celui du proton, ce qui combiné à l’abondance naturelle de l’isotope carbone 13 réduit la sensibilité d’un facteur 400.
Il existe aussi des séquences multi-dimensionnelles, permettant de projeter des ca- ractéristiques sur les autres dimensions. Ainsi, un spectre COrrelation SpectroscopY (COSY) permet de visualiser les noyaux (en l’occurrence ici les protons) interagissant entre eux par couplage Spin-Spin. Les séquences hétéronucléaires permettent d’obser- ver les interactions entre deux noyaux de nature différente. Dans le cas d’une séquence Heteronuclear single-quantum correlation spectroscopy (HSQC), on observe les cou- plages sur une liaison (on parle de J1) alors qu’avec la Heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation spectroscopy (HMBC), on les observe à plusieurs liaisons de distance (de J 2 jusqu’a J 4 dans certains des cas). L’autre intérêt de ces séquences est de s’affranchir d’une détection sur les noyaux carbone en transférant l’information qu’ils portent vers les protons, augmentant ainsi la sensibilité.
Il existe des centaines de séquences d’impulsions permettant d’obtenir plus d’in- formations, en particulier des séquences permettant de déterminer quels noyaux sont proches spatialement comme les Nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY), Ro- tating frame nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy (ROESY) qui peuvent être utiles pour obtenir des informations sur la structure tri-dimensionnelle.
Comme indiqué précedemment, le signal en spectrométrie RMN est dépendant d’un écart d’énergie. Cet écart peut être défini par la formule :
∆E = 2πhγB (2.6)
Où h est la constante de Planck, γ le rapport gyromagnétique du noyau considéré et B le champ vu par ce noyau. Ainsi la seule façon d’augmenter cette différence d’énergie est d’augmenter le champ magnétique. Ceci implique pour des champs puissants tels que ceux utilisés en routine dans les laboratoires, de l’ordre de 10 Teslas 1, correspondants à une fréquence de résonnance des protons de 400 MHz. Pour atteindre de tels champs (actuellement les appareils commerciaux dépassent les 20 T), il faut pour l’instant des aimants supraconducteurs, nécessitant des systèmes de refroidissement complexes et coûteux. Malgré cela, l’avantage des appareils à hauts champs est leur résolution et leur sensibilité accrue.
La spectrométrie RMN est un outil important dans le travail du phytochimiste, il per- met au delà de la détermination structurale des molécules, d’obtenir d’autres types d’in- formations, telles que pouvoir déterminer la composition relative ou absolue d’une mo- lécule dans un mélange (Heikkinen et al. 2003 ; Koskela, Kilpeläinen et Heikkinen 2005; Giraudeau et al. 2007; G.F. Pauli, Jaki et Lankin 2007; Napolitano et al. 2012), réaliser un travail de déduplication, visant à identifier rapidement les molé- cules connues afin de mettre rapidement en évidence les molécules bio-actives (F.C. Schroeder et al. 2007 ; F. C. Schroeder et al. 2008 ; Qiu et al. 2012). L’apparition d’ou- tils permettant de coupler un système chromatographique à la spectrométrie RMN re- pousse encore la portée de cette technique.
Le lecteur pourra se référer aux ouvrages suivants pour plus d’informations sur cette technique. Concernant les aspects théoriques, le Docteur Jean-Marc Nuzillard propose un livre en français. Bien qu’en cours d’écriture, il est déjà accessible, qui plus est librement (http://eos.univ-reims.fr/LSD/JmnSoft/livre.pdf). Il existe beaucoup d’ou- vrages sur la RMN, mais la qualité est très inégale. Parmi les ouvrages d’intérêt, on peut citer deux ouvrages (Keeler 2010) et (Levitt 2008), le second étant beaucoup plus dé- taillé sur l’aspect mathématique et physique. Concernant la détermination structurale, l’ouvrage du professeur Marcel Jaspars (Crews, Rodriguez et Jaspars 2009), ne traitant pas que de la RMN, est une référence, à utiliser conjointement à un ouvrage recensant des tables de déplacements chimiques tel que (Pretsch, Bühlmann et Badertscher 2009). -->

NMR metabolomics [@doi:10/dgtr9s]

Two dimensional NMR spectroscopic approaches for exploring plant metabolome: A review [@doi:10.1016/j.jare.2014.10.003]

Tutorial for the structure elucidation of small mole- cules by means of the LSD software [@doi:10.1002/mrc.4612]

NMR of natural products at the ‘nanomole-scale’ [@doi:10.1039/b920545b]

Computer-aided Dereplication and Structure Elucidation of Natural Products at the University of Reims [@doi:10.1002/minf.201700027]

`//TODO`{.red}.

### The *Quantified Metabolome*

only targeted [@doi:10.2174/138920111795909096]

QA/QC [@doi:10.1007/s11306-022-01926-3]

`//TODO`{.red}.

### The *Qualified Metabolome*

`//TODO`{.red}.

<!-- ADLIN

1.6.2.6 Metabolite identification/annotations
The key connection between the obtained MS metabolomics data and meaningful biological information is metabolite annotation (Schrimpe-Rutledge et al., 2016). Nevertheless, until now metabolite annotations remain a challenge in untargeted MS metabolomics studies (Da Silva et al., 2015; Dührkop et al., 2015). This is partly because, without the classical way of isolation and structural elucidation, assignment of a biomarker’s identity relies on the completeness and accessibility of spectral databases (Johnson & Lange, 2015). This process is called ‘dereplication’, which aimed at the rapid annotation of metabolites using spectral databases, without investing time in isolation procedures (Hubert et al., 2017). For MS dereplication, the first piece of information needed to constrain the thousands
Dereplication refers to the rapid identification of known secondary metabolites within complex mixtures such as crude plant extracts or microbial culture media, which employs state of the art techniques such as UHPLC-HRMS and NMR. This process however only result in putative identification and relies on the completeness of metabolite databases (Hubert, Nuzillard and Renault, 2017).
23
 Chapter 1
of possible candidate structures is correct MF determinations (Kind & Fiehn, 2007). This can be achieved through accurate mass measurement and heuristic filtering of the molecular formulas based on the seven golden rules (Kind & Fiehn, 2007). Information from MF can be used for rapid annotations especially when combined with taxonomical information but often, the MF alone is inadequate since many isomers occur in the plant. For example, the search for an MF of C27H30O16 yields 152 hits in the Dictionary of Natural Products (DNP) database (CRC Press & Taylor & Francis Group, 2019). All of these hits refer to flavonoids with different glycosylation patterns or different hydroxylation of the aglycones. For compounds exhibiting strong chromophore such as flavonoids, UV-PDA spectra could help to predict the aglycone types (Zhou et al., 2009).
More importantly, MS/MS fragmentation of compounds, which is achieved by breaking the analysed ion into fragment ions and measuring their m/z signals provides structural information that is more discriminatory than parent mass alone (Allard et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2013). The difference between a measured parent ion and subsequent daughter ions can be calculated and the given neutral loss ions can be used as diagnostic ions to elucidate some part of the molecular structure (Li & Claeys, 1994). For instance, the characteristics neutral loss ions of 162 amu (for hexose sugars), 132 amu (for pentose) and 176 amu (for glucuronides) signify the presence of O-glycosidic flavonoids whereas for C-glycosidic flavonoids, the characteristic cross-ring cleavage fragments are indicated by the [M-H-120]-, [M-H-90]- and [M- H-60]- fragment ions (Li & Claeys, 1994).
In NP research, MS/MS spectra can be analysed manually to extract structural information that corresponds to the MF. If an experimental MS/MS database exists, annotations can be performed rapidly and effectively. In the NP field, however, such databases are often restricted to a small number of NP (Van Der Hooft et al., 2011). Recently, it has been shown that MS/MS dataset can be efficiently organized in a graphical form called molecular networking (MN), which allows global visualization of collected MS/MS dataset and annotations of compounds based on experimental MS/MS libraries and in-silico databases (Wang et al., 2017; Watrous et al., 2012). MN has been successfully applied in many studies including for dereplication of biomarkers in plant metabolomics studies (Raheem et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019), as a tool to prioritize natural products discovery (Nothias et al., 2018; Wolfender et al., 2019), and in drug metabolism study (Allard et al., 2019; Le Daré et al., 2019). In MN, parent ions acquired from DDA experiments are grouped according to their similar fragmentation pattern using ‘cosine scores’, given based on the relatedness in MS/MS spectrum (Allard et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017). Such processing can be done on open-access platforms like GNPS (Wang et al., 2017) and MetGem (Olivon et al., 2018) and visualized using Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003). MS/MS networks usually consist of hundreds or thousands of ‘nodes’ (m/z features) arranged
      24

 Chapter 1
in many clusters that are linked together as ‘edge' based on similar fragmentation pattern, without prior knowledge of the identity of the m/z features (Wang et al., 2017).
Ideally, for the highest confidence in annotations, the measured MS/MS spectra are matched to the experimental MS/MS spectra library (Allard et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017). However, the current experimental spectral libraries such as GNPS libraries (Wang et al., 2017), Massbank (Horai et al., 2010) and METLIN (Guijas et al., 2018) represent less than 10 % of the 220’000 NP structures reported in DNP structural database (Allard et al., 2016). Therefore, there is a need for extensive annotation and computational fragmentation prediction or in-silico databases provides a promising option to increase annotation coverage (i.e. ISDB-DNP (Allard et al., 2016), MS Finder (Tsugawa et al., 2016), SIRIUS (Dührkop et al., 2015, 2019)).
Putative identification of metabolites using in-silico databases usually result in many possible candidates. There are several ways that can be utilized to rank these candidates such as taxonomic scoring, which takes into account the presence of the annotated candidate in the family, genus or species level of the biological source has been introduced recently to improve the value of annotations (Rutz et al., 2019). Moreover, physicochemical consistency of the candidate structure like retention time, retention order and collision cross-section (CCS) values (i.e. obtained from ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) experiments) for separating stereoisomers and isobaric compounds could refine the ranking of in-silico annotations (Bach et al., 2018; Plante et al., 2019). Another method to improve the accuracy of in-silico predictions is called ‘Network Annotation Propagation’, which utilized MN topology and structural similarity to propagate structural annotations (da Silva et al., 2018). As a mean to communicate the level of confidence for metabolite annotations in a standardized manner, guidelines for reporting metabolite annotations was first published in 2007 by the Chemical Analysis Working Group (CAWG) of the Metabolomics Standards Initiative (MSI) (Sumner et al., 2007). Modest revisions of these guidelines have also been proposed (Schrimpe-Rutledge et al., 2016; Schymanski et al., 2014). In general, there are five levels of confidence (i.e. decreasing from Level 1 to 5).
 Proposed level of confidence for metabolite identification in HR-MS (Schymanski et al., 2014)
Level 1: Confirmed structure (reference standards)
Level 2: Putative structure (library spectrum match, diagnostic evidence) Level 3: Tentative candidate(s)-could be structure, substituent, class Level 4: Molecular formula
Level 5: Exact mass
25

Chapter 1
Within this thesis (Chapter 4), the feasibility of in-silico predictions together with MN was tested
verified the in-silico annotations and propagate annotation of compounds for which standards were unattainable. -->

<!-- 
1.5.2 Recent advances in chemical profiling of natural extracts
In NP research, the two main well-established techniques to characterize the metabolome composition in natural extracts and biological exudates are MS and NMR. On one hand, mass
44
spectrometry (MS) is considered a high throughput detection technique characterized by its high sensitivity and selectivity. This technique allows accurate measurement of molecular weights and is capable of detecting components in small quantities over a wide concentration range in complex biological matrices. On the other hand, NMR is used to obtain detailed information on the molecular structure of analytes (connectivity between atoms). It allows non-selective profiling with a reduced sample preparation. It gives direct quantitative information on the proportion of different constituents in a mixture as well as the level of impurities. Compared to MS it is however much less sensitive. As today, it is still quite difficult to characterize the entire metabolome set of any sample by using a single technique. Therefore, the combination between different analytical techniques is highly recommended to identify the maximum number of metabolites in a high level of confidence.199
Crude extracts can be analyzed by MS or NMR either directly or in hyphenation with chromatography. On the MS side, analysis can be done without coupling to LC, for example, direct infusion of samples into MS interface (DIMS)211 and ambient mass spectrometry (AMS).212 These applications are widely used for in the medical field, which mainly applied for targeted analysis of biological fluids. The use of direct MS analysis saves time and requires little sample preparation but it is rather rare in NP research due to the effect of ion suppression and limitation in structural elucidation in addition to incapability to distinguish structural isomers. Therefore, to initiate extensive metabolic profiling that covers as much of the metabolome as possible, a prior chromatography step is often necessary to facilitate the annotation process.
Therefore, LC-MS represents the main metabolite profiling technique in NP research. GC-MS is also commonly used in NP research, it is mainly used to analyze essential oils from plants.213 it is also a very valuable method to analyze primary metabolites after derivatization.214
Direct NMR profiling of natural extracts allows a good view of the major metabolites with minimal effort in sample preparation. This technique is particularly useful for preliminary inspection of metabolites as explained later in section 1.5.3.
1.5.2.1 LC-MSandLC-UVbasedmetaboliteprofiling
Mass spectrometry is a robust tool integrated in most metabolomics research. As mentioned before, the hyphenation between LC and MS is a common approach in modern metabolomic workflows featured with its sensitivity and wide metabolome coverage. The quality of the results depends strongly on the efficiency of the chromatographic separation and the accuracy of the associated mass analyzer. Modern mass analyzers such as Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance (FTICR), orbitrap or quadrupole time of flight are widely used in natural product research.215
One of the most commonly used hyphenated instruments is the ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography coupled to ultraviolet detector and mass spectrometry system (UHPLC-UV-MS) which was firstly commercialized in 2004. It is superior to the conventional HPLC-UV-MS as it has the capability to minimize the acquisition time by 5-10 folds without compromising the
45

chromatographic resolution. This significant reduction in time allows for high-throughput metabolic fingerprinting, which is often required when large numbers of substances need to be compared. UHPLC provides an approximately 3-fold improvement in resolution over conventional HPLC if the same chromatographic gradient time is maintained, allowing for detailed metabolome analysis.
In addition, the coupling of UHPLC with high-resolution MS (UHPLC-UV-HRMS) generates more accurate MS information and allocates up to 4 decimal places in the m/z values with a mass accuracy < 5 ppm. This allows the accurate determination of the corresponding molecular formulas, also considering the isotopic pattern information.
Profiling of extracts by UHPLC improves peak shape and allows for better peak resolution with faster elution at dedicated instruments that allow for higher pressure (up to 15,000 psi or 1,000 bar), higher temperature and small (sub 2 μm) silica packed chromatographic columns.216, 217 Beside using the well-known C18 columns as a stationary phase in reverse phase UHPLC, other stationary phases are used to cover various types of compounds such as hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC), size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), ion-exchange chromatography (IEX) have been used according to the targeted type of compounds (e.g., SEC for polysaccharides and amide HILIC for extremely polar analytes).218
The use of UHPLC in general can remarkably speed up the separation time without affecting peak selectivity and resolution. In addition, minimal quantity of solvents is needed to run the analysis and small amount of sample is needed to be injected (few microliters). These substantial benefits made the UHPLC-UV-HRMS an excellent technique for high-throughput analysis.
In such an analytical platform, ultraviolet detection is performed online in parallel with MS acquisition. This is done using a photodiode array (PDA) detector which is mainly used to obtain complementary spectroscopic information for compounds with characteristic chromophores. There are three types of UV detectors;219 1) Single wavelength detector that detects one specific wavelength, this technique is obsolete and only found nowadays in portable equipment. 2) Variable wavelength also called “UV-visible” which is more sensitive and allows to monitor the visible region of the light spectrum. 3) PDA is operating as a multi-UV-vis detector, which allows to monitor the entire UV spectrum for each analyte, this technique is the most preferred to be connected to modern UHPLC-MS systems.
The mass spectrometer is a robust tool for characterizing the chemical content of a complex extract. Several ionization techniques can be used for UHPLC which typically ionizes individual molecules in either positive mode or negative mode or both based on their physiochemical properties. Examples of these devices include electrospray ionization (ESI) which is frequently used in metabolomics, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI). Retention time, exact molecular mass, isotope pattern and polarity state of the individual analytes are the major physiochemical properties obtained from UHPLC-HRMS.
46

However, the main limitation of this technique is the lack of structural information on the analytes, because in natural extracts many compounds may have identical molecular formula (isomers) or close exact mass (isobars). Therefore, MS data must be enriched with complementary structural information including fragmentation details.
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is an instrumental technique where two mass analyzers are working in sequence to analyze ionized compounds. HRMS/MS can distinguish multiple compounds that share similar accurate masses by detecting different fragmental pattern that gives partial structural information. In this technique, the molecules separated by LC are ionized mainly by ESI and the first spectrometer (MS1) separates these ions by their m/z ratio. Ions of a particular m/z are selected. The fragments are then introduced into the second spectrometer (MS2), which separates and detects those fragments. Since fragmentation spectra are structure-specific, this additional fragmentation process provides additional structural information and allows the distinguishing of ionized molecules that have the same or very similar m/z values (e.g. structural isomers). Ion trapping mass analyzers, such as OrbitrapTM, are providing up to 1,000,000 resolving power at m/z < 400.220 These HRMS/MS instruments were developed to break down precursor ions into fragments that can be interpreted as parts of the chemical structure. These instruments allow to obtain spectra of fragments with a great precision and sensitivity. The speed of acquisition also allows to obtain this information on a large number of compounds in an extract ideally in a single analysis. A recent example of a typical application of UHPLC-UV-HRMS/MS metabolite profiling analysis is found in Tienaho et al.221 The authors used this approach to investigate the metabolic profile of hot water extracts of 3 dark septate endophytic fungi. By using non-targeted metabolomics workflow, they could putatively identify up to 220 compounds.
The efficiency and the high sensitivity of LC-MS and LC-MS/MS come at a price. Sample preparation for these techniques often required multiple steps to preserve instrument performances and avoid contamination. This expands the total analysis time and requires careful periodic maintenance. Modern systems are accepting only LCMS grade solvents which greatly increase the price per sample. In addition, one of the main limitations of LCMS is that the detection is not directly quantitative and the MS response factor depends strongly on the ionizability of the analytes.
To overcome this issue, an additional universal quantitative detector (e.g. charged aerosol detector (CAD)) could be connected to provide such information.222 Due to the complexity of NPs and the wide variety in their structures, their spectral traces cannot be measured by a single technique. Therefore, multi-detection setups are commonly used in NP analysis. UV is the primary detection method, which is usually connected to LC as a built-in device. There are however some classes of compounds that cannot be traced by UV due to the lack of chromophore properties.222 Therefore, additional detectors can be connected to maximize traceability. To achieve complete monitoring of all present metabolites, alternative detection techniques, such as CAD and ELSD (see section 3.3.1), showed great complementary detection capabilities in NP research.223, 224 In addition, post-
47

chromatographic fraction analysis by UPLC-HRMS has proven to be the most effective approach to assess the identification of individual compounds.225, 226 -->

#### The *Annotated Metabolome*

`//TODO`{.red}

<!-- 
ABDUL
1.5.2.2 LC-MSbasedNPdereplication
Classically, identification of unknown NPs requires their isolation through several purification steps of complex extracts. The structure elucidation and the absolute configuration of isolated compounds are then characterized by using spectroscopy techniques such as UV, IR, HRMS/MS, ECD and 1D/2D NMR. However, as explained, this approach is laborious, costly and time consuming. Unfortunately, most of the time, this approach only identifies compounds that already published in the literature, which makes this method not very efficient. This is especially true if the biological activity of the isolate has already been described. Therefore, dereplication has been developed as a proper solution for this issue, by incorporating untargeted chemical profiling of crude extracts that can be performed as initial step to assign all known molecules and help making a good decision about the subsequent isolation step if needed.227 This approach is mainly based on the mapping of spectral traces of the metabolite of interest to the corresponding databases. It allows an early identification of numerous metabolites which already identified from relevant biological sources. One problem, however, is that there is no universal database containing all the spectral data of the more than 300,000 NPs reported to date that could allow direct spectral matching notably for HRMS/MS.
In mass spectrometry, a given ionized molecule can be putatively identified by matching its exact mass, elemental composition, adduct formation and fragmentation pattern with reported compounds in available databases (Figure 1.12). Dereplication can be performed as a holistic approach to inspect all metabolites within a given extract.227 In this approach, spectral noise reduction and efficient MS features selection is important to focus only on annotating characteristic compounds for a given extract.
Noise diminution and spectra deconvolution can be performed by using data mining software which allows also to assign degenerated MS features (e.g. adducts and dimers). MS data mining software include, MZmine and XCMS (open source), MetAlign, Progenesis QI (Waters), MetaboScape (Bruker), or the most recent software Compound Discoverer (Thermo). The following step is to match the calculated MFs with a corresponding library (e.g., DNP). DNP is the most comprehensive source of natural small molecules providing more than 290,000 reported compounds.174 Furthermore, in case of analyzing marine-sourced extracts, the annotation results can be restricted to relevant marine metabolites by using the dictionary of marine natural products (60,000 compounds). However, these dictionaries mainly compile structural data and do not provide any spectral information. They are used to verify the occurrence of a MF in a given source organism. Thus MF-based matching dereplication cannot provide a confident annotation but gives some clues on the possible presence of preciously reported compounds with the same MF. Therefore, to increase the level of confidence, dereplication can be confirmed through MS/MS spectral matching
48
against experimental mass data repository (e.g., GNPS, Metlin, NIST). A major drawback of this process is the lack of equal collision energy between instruments, which result in variation of fragmentation pattern in addition to the limited number of identified compounds in those databases. For this, the development of databases that contain theoretical fragmentation spectra acquired by machine learning (also known as in-silico databases) has significantly improved the annotation results. A good example of this, the in-silico database of DNP (ISDB-DNP), which composed of more than 170,000 compounds in positive and negative mode ionization.228 This approach is featured with its efficient integration with molecular network (MN) based annotation.228
Regarding MS-based dereplication, there are some limitations to be considered. In natural extracts, some compounds are not ionizable, thus, dereplication of these molecules cannot be performed by MS. In the case of the use of experimental spectral data, there is a variability in the adjustments of
the acquisition parameters (source setting, collision energy,) on different analyzers, which leads to strong limitation for a direct confident matching. Lastly, there is a limitation to distinguish the absolute stereochemistry and regiochemistry of the isomers.
Figure 1.12. General workflow for LCHRMS/MS based dereplication.
1.5.2.3 The utility of molecular networking to assist LCMS based dereplication
Mass spectrometry based molecular networking is a computational strategy that provides visual displays of the chemical space generated by connecting analyzed molecules through their tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) relationships.229 This visualization approach allows the interpretation of complex data from MS analysis by identifying potential similarities between all MS/MS data.230 Natural extracts are known for their complexity and the abundant variability of the compounds they contain. MS/MS-based data mining of a single extract may result in thousands of features having different MS1 and corresponding MS2 spectra representing hundreds of existing compounds. In biological matrices, due to the existence of common biosynthetic pathways, metabolites typically found in series of chemically related molecules that share similar MS/MS spectral fragments most likely share similar structures.231 Correlation between molecules depending on their tandem mass fragmentation pattern can tremendously help to identify the chemical content in much less time
 49

compare to classical isolation procedures. The concept of molecular networking provides a robust and rapid strategy for MS-based dereplication and the identification of novel compounds.228, 232-234
The construction of molecular networks allows the observation of individual precursor ions and their adducts as nodes. Nodes with MS/MS spectra that share a similar fragmentation pattern are grouped into clusters according to spectral similarity based on a cosine score. Clustering depends on the algorithm and parameters chosen (Figure 1.13). Adjacent nodes are connected with edges which indicate the level of similarity. The annotations of the nodes in the MN allow their attribution to known compounds referenced by the database of choice and suggest the presence of analogues of the sample. Node information can be enriched by mapping to additional metadata such as abundance, taxonomy, bioassay results, etc.234 Those metadata can be visualized through the nodes by changing in their color, shape and size. MN is characterized by its compatibility with any MS platform and the generated data can be integrated into any phytochemical workflow.232 Tandem mass data pre-processing and feature alignment can be treated with popular LC-MS analysis software such as MZmine235 and XCMS.236 MN can be created online in an external server through a crowed-sourced web-based platform called GNPS229 or offline in the user’s PC by using a downloadable software such as MetGem.237
The aim of MS/MS-based molecular networking is to organize large MS datasets by clustering structurally related parent by exploiting spectral similarity. MNs are built up through the pairwise spectral comparisons in a dataset, creating an MS/MS spectral network. A cosine score is calculated between every possible pair of consensus MS/MS spectra, which indicates a grade of spectral similarity between them (the range can be grade 0 to 1, where “0” means totally different and “1” represents identical spectra).238 According to the level of resolution of the instrument and desired arrangement of the MN, some parameters can be modified such as precursor mass and ion mass tolerances, minimum cosine score, minimum matched fragment ions and maximum number of neighbor nodes. Moreover, metadata (such as taxonomical or bioactivity info) and quantification features can be added to each ion from external excel tables.
 -->

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Spectral Similarity

`//TODO`{.red}.

Dot product [@doi:10/bhw492]

Weightings [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts083]

New methods (Spec2Vec and consorts)

#### The *Dereplicated Metabolome*

`//TODO`{.red}.

#### The *Elucidated Metabolome*

<!-- 
1.6.2.7 Compound isolation and purification
In spite of the progress in MS and NMR dereplication for assessing chemical compositions rapidly, the necessity for compound isolation and purification in NP research is sometimes inevitable. Isolation is still needed in several circumstances, including to identify unknown active metabolites, to elucidate possible isomers or when reference standards are required but are not available commercially. For this purpose, several separation techniques including liquid-solid chromatography (i.e. MPLC, semi/preparative HPLC) and counter-current chromatography (CCC) may be employed at the preparative scale (Friesen et al., 2015; Pauli et al., 2008). Both techniques were used during the course of this thesis (Chapter 4) to obtain reference standards for Ficus deltoidea variety (section1.9).
In order to detect the separated analytes (during separation or by post chromatography analyses), various detection tool and combinations of detector can be coupled to a chromatographic system (Michel et al., 2012; J. Wang et al., 2011). A UV/PDA detects only chromophore compounds and another universal detector such as evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) has the advantage of detecting non-chromophore and non-electroactive group of NPs and providing quantitative information while MS detector enables targeted metabolites to be identified based on the molecular mass feature.
There is a wide range of methods for liquid-solid chromatography, depending on the stage of the purification and the final purpose of isolation. Methods such as vacuum liquid chromatography (VLC), which uses silica or reversed-phase C18 are preferred for the fractionation or sample clean-up due to its ease of use (Bucar et al., 2013). For the purification of gram amounts of complex crude extracts, an efficient MPLC procedure has been established in our lab using a glass column (920 × 49 mm, i.d., Buchi) containing C18 packing material (15–25 μm C18) (Challal et al., 2015). This procedure includes a geometrical transfer program developed for an effective separation prediction and scaling up methods from analytical HPLC (for optimizing gradient method) to MPLC scale. A special aluminium cartridge pre-column (pressure up to 50 bars) was also designed to allow dry load introduction of the sample to be made at high flow rate while maintaining system backpressure (Challal et al., 2015). When further purifications of milligram amounts of material are needed, a preparative HPLC system may be utilized which affords higher resolution of separation through usage of smaller particle
especially for annotating
polyphenols in Ficus deltoidea. Isolated standard markers further
26
Chapter 1
size column. An important improvement in preparative HPLC technology is the recycling preparative HPLC, where the sample can be recycled in part of full by returning the eluents into the same column multiple times until baseline separation is achieved (Sidana & Joshi, 2013). This technique increases the chromatographic resolution of a co-elute peak similar to when a longer column is used but without backpressure problem. The solvent consumptions in recycling prep HPLC are also kept at a minimum since the same solvents are being used during the multiple recycling cycles. Recycling in HPLC system has been successfully applied for the purification of numerous NPs having similar retention characteristics including positional isomers, enantiomers (Nagai et al., 2011) and for enrichment and purification of low-abundance compounds (Zou et al., 2014).
Another common purification technique for NPs isolation is CCC. Over the past 40 years, CCC technology has progressed from the droplet counter-current, high-speed counter-current chromatography (HSCCC) and to the latest technology of centrifugal partition chromatography (CPC). In general, all CCC techniques follows the principle of liquid-liquid partition, which consider the partition coefficient of the relative solubility of analytes in two different immiscible liquids. For CCC techniques, two phases of solvents are held in place by a centrifugal force (i.e. either hydrodynamic (HSCCC) or hydrostatic (CPC)). For this thesis work, an HSCCC system was used isolation of reference standards from F. deltoidea. The basic component of this system consisted of helically coiled tubing that rotates on its own axis to retain the stationary phase (also liquid) in the column. To achieve planetary rotation movement, a gear is assembled in such that the helical coils revolve around a central axis motion (Pauli et al., 2008; Q. W. Zhang et al., 2018). When the mobile phase is pumped through a column containing the stationary phase, the two phases of liquids come in contact with each other. This dynamic mixing and settling action permit separation of analytes according to their respective solubility in the two phases. Compared to traditional LC, CCC technique provides several advantages due to the liquid nature of the stationary phase and absence of any solid support. This includes the lower cost for maintaining and purchasing columns, high sample recovery with no irreversible adsorption to the solid stationary phase, high loading capacity that allows injection of a high concentrated sample with lower risk of column overloading and tailing (Bojczuk et al., 2017; Q. W. Zhang et al., 2018). Furthermore, industrial scale-up using CCC has been evaluated on NPs. One example is the purification of alkaloids by pH zone refining using CPC technique. This study showed that up to 150 g of Catharanthus roseus crude extract could be separated on a 1950 mL column with a productivity of about 4 kg of processed crude extract per day (Kotland et al., 2016). Nevertheless, some of its limitations include the narrow polarity window for separation (Q. W. Zhang et al., 2018) and the difficulty in the optimization of the solvent system (Bojczuk et al., 2017).
 -->
`//TODO`{.red}.

combination nmr ms [@doi:10.1002/anie.200603821]

<!-- 
ABDUL 
1.5.3.3 NMR/MS data combination approaches
Strategies to effectively combine the sensitivity of MS with the robustness of NMR are in high demand in the field of metabolomics. Indeed, the combination of MS and NMR remains essential for unambiguous structure determination, both to increase confidence in dereplication and to identify new structures. This is evident from the growing number of studies published over the past decade that address the technical challenges of this combination.264-266 The principle idea of this combination is to achieve a synergistic use from MS and NMR by correlating detected masses to deconvoluted NMR signals in addition to complementary multivariate analysis, which lead finally to identify the main components and to assign biomarkers.267
One of the recent achievements in this field is the SUMMIT MS/NMR, a strategy based on the combination between HRMS and NMR to explore the content of complex mixtures.268 This strategy allows the generation of unique MFs for each analyte that are detected by high resolution MS. For each generated MF, all compatible structures will be determined, then the predicted NMR spectrum (chemical shift) will be generated and compared to the experimental NMR spectrum. The employment of SUMMIT MS/NMR approach was able to elucidate the correct structures from large number of suggested structures.267 Several new metabolites were detected from an extract of Escherichia coli as an example to validate this method.269
Another valid strategy is similar to the one mentioned above, but the steps are in the opposite direction. The starting point is to generate putative identifications by carefully inspecting 1D and 2D NMR spectra and comparing them to selected NMR databases. Then, their calculated ions, adducts and characteristic isotopic distributions are automatically simulated, and the corresponding signals in the experimental MS spectrum are automatically calculated and assigned. This approach is called "NMR/MS translator".270 An application of this workflow allowed to identify tens of metabolites from human urine.270
 -->

#### The *De novo Metabolome*

`//TODO`{.red}.

msnovelist [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01486-3] library based
