#### Conclusion

Efficient characterization of specialized metabolomes is a key challenge in metabolomics and NP research.
Recent technical advances allow access to an ever-increasing amount of data, raising the need for ad hoc computational solutions for their interpretation.
The metabolite annotation process, which can be resumed to the comparison of attributes of the queried features against attributes of the candidate structures can benefit from information complementary to the classically used MS/MS fragmentation.
Ideally, the quantification of multiple attributes’ similarities (or dissimilarities) should be integrated within a metascoring system.
Here, we demonstrate that the consideration of the taxonomic distance separating the biological sources of both the queried analytes and the candidate structures can drastically improve the efficiency of existing MS-based computational metabolite annotation solutions.
Metabolite annotation is crucial to guide chemical ecology research or drug discovery projects.
More than two hundred years later, the present work thus supports the first of De Candolle’s assumptions, “Plant taxonomy would be the most useful guide to man in his search for new industrial and medicinal plants” [@decandolleEssaiProprietesMedicales1816].
His correlated postulate, “Chemical characteristics of plants will be most valuable to plant taxonomy in the future”, will be equally interesting to verify with computational approaches.
Various strategies have been proposed to exploit structural (or biosynthetic) relationships among metabolites and further organize the producing organisms [@doi:10.1155/2017/5296729; @doi:10.1007/s00049-017-0250-4; @doi:10.1111/tpj.14292] and interesting developments will appear once robust metabolite annotation solution are coupled to comprehensive [DB](#db)s compiling structures and their biological sources.
Indeed, specialized metabolome annotation could be a novel way to infer the taxonomic position of an unknown sample, just as valid as a genetic sequencing.
Metabolite annotation can benefit from taxonomy and taxonomic relationships can be inferred from precise metabolite characterization.
Efforts in both directions should thus fuel a *virtuous cycle of research aiming to better understand Life and its chemistry*.
