## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Specialized metabolites define the chemical signature of a living organism.
Plants, sponges and corals, but also microorganisms (bacteria and fungi), are known to biosynthesize a wealth of such chemicals, which can play a role as defense or communication agents (Brunetti et al., 2018).
Throughout history, humans have been relying on plant derived products for a variety of purposes: housing, feeding, clothing and, especially, medication.
In fact, our therapeutic arsenal is deeply dependent on the chemistry of natural products (NPs) whether they are used in mixtures, purified forms or for hemi-synthetic drug development.
After a period of disregard by the pharmaceutical industry, NPs are now the object of renewed interest, partly because of the promises of the latest technological developments (Shen, 2015).
Developments in metabolite profiling by mass spectrometry (MS) grant access to large volumes of high-quality spectral data from minimal amount of samples and appropriate data analysis workflows allow to efficiently mine such data (Wolfender et al., 2019).
Initiatives such as the Global Natural Products Social (GNPS) molecular networking (MN) project offer both a living MS repository and the possibility to establish MN organizing MS data (Wang et al., 2016).
However, despite such advancements, metabolite identification remains a major challenge for both NP research and metabolomics (Kind et al., 2018).
Metabolite identification of a novel compound requires physical isolation of the analyte followed by complete NMR acquisition and three-dimensional structural establishment via X-ray diffraction or chiroptical techniques.
For previously described compounds, metabolite identification implies complete matching of physicochemical properties between the analyte and a standard compound (including chiroptical properties).
Metabolite identification is thus a tedious and labor-intensive process, which should ideally be reserved to novel metabolites description. Any less complete process should be defined as metabolite annotation.
By definition, metabolite annotation can be applied at a higher throughput and offers an effective proxy for the chemical characterization of complex matrices.
This process includes dereplication (the annotation of previously described molecules prior to any physical isolation process) and allows focusing isolation and metabolite identification efforts on potentially novel compounds only (Gaudêncio and Pereira, 2015).


Given its sensitivity, selectivity and structural determination potential, MS is a tool of choice for metabolite annotation in complex mixtures.
Various computational MS solutions have been developed to link experimental spectra to chemical structures. They can be classified into experimental rule-based strategies [MassHunter, Agilent Technologies], combinatorial fragmentation strategies [MetFrag, (Ruttkies et al., 2016)], machine learning based approaches using stochastic Markov modelling [CFM-ID, (Allen et al., 2014; Djoumbou-Feunang et al., 2019)] or predicting fragmentation trees [Sirius (Böcker et al., 2009; Dührkop et al., 2019)].
Computationally demanding ab initio calculations, modeling the gas-phase fragmentation process, have also been proposed (Bauer and Grimme, 2016).
The output of such tools is, in general, a list of candidate molecules ranked according to a score.
Such score can be based on a single measure (e.g. spectral similarity in CFM-annotate) (Allen et al., 2014) or integrate combined parameters (MS-Finder, Sirius) (Tsugawa et al., 2016; Dührkop et al., 2019; Tsugawa et al., 2019).
The rationale behind comprehensive scoring systems is that orthogonal information (not directly related to spectral comparison) should further strengthen the metabolite annotation process.
This has been illustrated in the past by using the number of literature references related to a candidate structure and basic retention time scoring based on logP in MetFrag 2.2 (Ruttkies et al., 2016).
Recently, the integration of retention order prediction to an MS/MS prediction tool provided increased performance in metabolite annotation (Bach et al., 2018).
Another example is the Network Annotation Propagation (NAP) approach, which takes advantage of the topology of a MN to proceed to a re-ranking of annotated candidates within a cluster where structural consistency is expected (da Silva et al., 2018).
In our view, increased confidence in specialized metabolite annotation can be achieved by the establishment of a metascoring system capturing the similarity of diverse attributes shared by the queried analytes and candidate structures (Allard et al., 2017).
Such metascore could for example consider 1) spectral similarity 2) taxonomic distance between the producer of the candidate compound and the annotated biological matrix 3) structural consistency within a cluster and 4) physico-chemical consistency.
A conceptual overview of such metascore is illustrated in Figure 1.


TODO FIG.
Figure 1 Conceptual overview of a possible metascoring system for specialized metabolite annotation incorporating 1) spectral similarity or fingerprint similarity 2) taxonomic distance between the biological source of the queried spectra and candidate annotations 3) structural consistency within a cluster [see (da Silva et al., 2018)] and 4) physico-chemical consistency (see Ruttkies et al., 2016; Bach et al., 2018). A factor (wn) should allow to attribute relative weight to individual scores and modulate their contribution to the overall score.

To the best of our knowledge, the automated inclusion of the taxonomic dimension within a scoring system has not been considered in current metabolite annotation strategies.
The central hypothesis of this work is directly inferred from the characteristics of the specialized metabolome.
Unlike primary metabolites, which are mostly ubiquitous compounds central to organism functioning, specialized metabolites are, by definition, strongly linked to the taxonomic position of the producing organism.
It thus appears desirable to consider taxonomic information when describing the chemistry of an organism.
A taxonomic filtering process could be used to limit a database (DB) to compounds previously isolated from organisms situated within a given taxonomic distance from the biological source of the analyte to annotate.
However, results of chemotaxonomic studies also highlight the presence of broadly distributed metabolites.
For example, liriodenine (MUMCCPUVOAUBAN-UHFFFAOYSA-N) is a widely distributed alkaloid produced by more than 50 distinct biological sources, it is found in over 30 genera belonging to 13 botanical families.
Convergent biosynthetic pathways offer intriguing example of unrelated species, shaped by evolution, that end up producing similar classes of compounds (Pichersky and Lewinsohn, 2011).
To proceed to the annotation of such compounds, a taxonomically informed scoring allowing, both, to consider spectral similarity and taxonomic information while conserving the independence of the individual resulting scores appears as a better solution than a basic filtering process.

In the frame of this study we propose such taxonomically informed scoring system and benchmark the impact of taxonomic distance consideration on a set of 2,107 identified molecules using three different computational mass spectrometry metabolite annotation tools (ISDB-DNP, MS-Finder and Sirius).