## Materials and Methods

### Outline and Implementation of the Taxonomically Informed Scoring System

To evaluate the importance of considering taxonomic information in the annotation process, three different computational mass spectrometry-based metabolite annotation tools were used (namely, ISDB-DNP, MS-Finder and Sirius).
This resulted in three different outputs constituted by a list of candidates returned by each tool for the entries of the benchmarking dataset.
These candidates were ranked according to the scoring system of each tool.
R scripts in the form of markdown notebooks were written to perform 1) cleaning and standardization of the outputs (1_taxo_cleaner.Rmd) 2) taxonomically informed scoring and re-ranking (2_taxo_scorer.Rmd).
First, the outputs were standardized to a table containing on each row: a unique spectral identifier (CCMSLIB N°) of the queried spectra, the short InChIKey of the candidate structures, the score of the candidates (within the scoring system of the used metabolite annotation tool), the biological source of the standard compound and the biological source of the candidate structures.
As described in the results section, a score, inversely proportional to the taxonomic distance between the biological source of the annotated compound and the one biological source of the candidate structure, was given when an exact match was found between both biological sources at the family, genus or/and species level(s).
A sum of this score and the original score yielded the taxonomically informed score.
This score was then used to re-rank the candidates.
See Figure 2 for a schematic overview of the taxonomically informed scoring process.
Scripts are available at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer.

### Dataset Preparation

#### Structural and Biological Sources Dataset

In the Dictionary of Natural Products (v 27.1), taxonomic information appears in two fields.
The Biological Source field, which is constituted by a free text field reporting occurrence of a specific compound and the Compound Type field which reports various codes corresponding to molecule classes or taxonomic position at the family level.
As an example, for the entry corresponding to larictrin 3-glucoside (ODXINVOINFDDDD-UHFFFAOYSA-N), the Biological Source field indicates “Isol. from Larix spp., Cedrus sp. and other plant spp. Constit. of Vitis vinifera cv. Petit Verdot grapes and Abies amabilis.” and the Compound Type field indicates “V.K.52600 W.I.40000 W.I.35000 Z.N.50000 Z.Q.71600” suggesting that biological sources are found in the Phyllocladaceae (Z.N.50000) and Vitaceae family (Z.Q.71600).
The biological source information is reported in a non-homogeneous way and multiple biological sources are reported in the same row.
In order to extract taxonomic information out of the free text contents, the gnfinder program (https://github.com/gnames/gnfinder) was used.
Gnfinder takes UTF8-encoded text as inputs and returns back JSON-formatted output that contains detected scientific names.
It automatically detects the language of the text and uses complementary heuristic and natural language processing algorithms to detect patterns corresponding to scientific binomial or uninomial denomination.
Gnfinder was forced for English language detection.
In addition to scientific denomination extraction, gnfinder allows to match the detected names against the Global Names index services (https://index.globalnames.org).
The preferred taxonomy backbone was set to be Catalogue of Life.
This last step allowed to return the full taxonomy down to the entered taxa level.
It also allows to resolve synonymy.
Since gnfinder is designed to mine raw texts, the JSON formatted output indicates the position of the detected name in the original input by character position.
A python script was written to output a .csv file with the found name and taxonomy in front of the corresponding input.
When multiple biosources were found for an entry, this one was duplicated in order to obtain a unique structure/biological source pair per row.
The script is available online (gnfinder_field_scrapper.py).

#### Structural and Spectral Dataset

All GNPS libraries and publicly accessible third-party libraries were retrieved online (https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/libraries.jsp) and concatenated as a single spectral file (Full_GNPS_lib.mgf) in the .mgf format.
A python Jupyter notebook (mgf_filterer.ipynb) was created to filter.mgf spectral file according to specific parameters: maximum and minimum number of fragments per spectrum and defined spectral ID (e.g. CCMLIB N°).
The spectral file was filtered to retain only entries having at least 6 fragments.
For spectra containing more than 500 fragments, only the 500 most intense were kept.
A second python Jupyter notebook (GNPS_parser_cleaner.ipynb) was written to proceed to 1) extraction of relevant metadata (parent ion mass, SMILES, InChI, library origin, source instrument, molecule name and individual spectrum id value (CCMSLIB N°) 2) filtering entries having at least one structural information associated (SMILES and/or InChI) and corresponding to protonated adducts and 3) converting structures to their InChIKey, a 27-character hashed version of the full InChI.
The InChIKey conversion was realized using the RDKit 2019.03.1 framework (RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics; http://www.rdkit.org).
This resulted in a structural dataset (GNPS_lib_structural.tsv) of 40138 entries constituted by 8558 unique compounds.
The dataset was further filtered to keep entries which parent masses were comprised between 100 and 1,500 Da.
Duplicate structures and stereoisomers were removed by keeping distinct InChIKey according to the first layer (first 14 characters) of the hash code.
This spectral dataset encompasses spectra acquired on a variety of MS platforms (See Supplementary Figure S7).
Scripts are available at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer.
Input and output data are available on OSF at the following address (https://osf.io/bvs6x/).

#### Structural, Spectral, and Biological Sources Dataset (Benchmarking Dataset)

Once the structural and biological sources dataset and the structural and spectral datasets were prepared (as described above), both were joined in order to attribute a biological source to each spectrum.
The scripts used to proceed to the merging step are part of the python Jupyter notebook (GNPS_parser_cleaner.ipynb).
Since in most cases it is not expected to differentiate stereoisomers based on their MS spectra, the combination of both datasets was made using the short InChIKey (first 14 characters of the InChIKey) as a common key.
In this merging process, only entries having biological source information resolved against the Catalogue of Life and complete down to the species level were retained.
However, this merging implied that, for a given biological source, the information on the 3D aspects of the structure was lost.
While this was not an issue for the benchmarking objective of this work the resulting dataset does not constitute a reliable occurrence dataset for annotation that needs stereoisomers to be differentiated.
The resulting dataset containing structural, spectral and biological sources information was constituted by 2107 distinct entries and was named benchmarking dataset.
The scripts allowing to generate the benchmarking dataset are available at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer.
The benchmarking dataset spectral data (benchmarking_dataset_spectral.mgf), and associated metadata (benchmarking_dataset_metadata.tsv) are available at the following address (https://osf.io/bvs6x/). 

### Computational Metabolite Annotation Tools

#### ISDB-DNP

The ISDB-DNP (In Silico DataBase—Dictionary of Natural Products) is a metabolite annotation workflow that we previously developed (Allard et al., 2016).
A version using the freely available Universal Natural Products Database (ISDB-UNPD) is available online (http://oolonek.github.io/ISDB/).
This approach is focused on specialized metabolites annotation and is constituted by a pre-fragmented theoretical spectral DB version of the DNP.
The in silico fragmentation was performed using CFM-ID, a software using a probabilistic generative model for the fragmentation process, and a machine learning approach for learning parameters for this model from MS/MS data (Allen et al., 2015).
CFM, is, to the best of our knowledge, the only solution available at the moment allowing to output a spectrum with fragment intensity prediction.
The matching phase between experimental spectra and the theoretical DB is based on a spectral similarity computation performed using Tremolo as a spectral library search tool (Wang and Bandeira, 2013).
The parameters used to proceed to the benchmarking dataset analysis were the following: parent mass tolerance 0.05 Da, minimum cosine score 0.1, no limits for the number of returned candidates.

#### MS-Finder

This in silico fragmentation approach considers multiple parameters such as bond dissociation energies, mass accuracies, fragment linkages and various hydrogen rearrangement rules at the candidate ranking phase (Tsugawa et al., 2016).
The resulting scoring system range from 1 to 10.
The parameters used to proceed to the benchmarking dataset analysis were the following: mass tolerance setting: 0.1 Da (MS1), 0.1 Da (MS2); relative abundance cut off: 5% formula finder settings: LEWIS and SENIOR check (yes), isotopic ratio tolerance: 20%, element probability check (yes), element selection (O, N, P, S, Cl, Br).
Structure Finder setting: tree depth: 2, maximum reported number: 100, data sources (all except MINEs DBs.
Total number of structures, 321,617.) MS-Finder v. 3.22 was used, it is available at the following address: http://prime.psc.riken.jp/Metabolomics_Software/MS-FINDER/.

#### Sirius

Sirius 4.0.1 is considered as a state-of-the-art metabolite annotation solution, which combines molecular formula calculation and the prediction of a molecular fingerprint of a query compound from its fragmentation tree and spectrum (Dührkop et al., 2019).
Sirius uses a DB of 73,444,774 unique structures for its annotations.
The parameters used to proceed to the benchmarking dataset analysis were the following for Sirius molecular formula calculation: possible ionization [M+H]+, instrument: Q-TOF, ppm tolerance 50 ppm, Top molecular formula candidates: 3, filter:formulas from biological DBs. For the CSI : FingerID step, the parameters were the following: possible adducts: [M+H]+, filter: compounds present in biological DB, maximal number of returned candidates: unlimited.
Sirius 4.0.1 is available at the following address: https://bio.informatik.uni-jena.de/software/sirius/.


### Results Analysis

The F1 score was calculated for each evaluated metabolite annotation tool before and after the taxonomically informed scoring step.
The F1 score is the harmonic mean of the recall (True Positive/(True Positive + False Negative)) and precision rate (True Positive/(True Positive + False Positive)) of a tool.
The True Positive (TP) corresponds to the number of correct candidate annotations at rank 1, the False Positive (FP) to the number of wrong candidate annotations at rank 1, and the False Negative (FN) to the number of correct annotations at rank >1.
The F1 score is then calculated as follows:
F1 score = 2 × (Recallrate×Precisionrate)(Recallrate+Precisionrate)

An R notebook to analyze the results of the taxonomically informed scoring process and plot the figures of this manuscript is available online (taxo_figures.Rmd) at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer.

### Optimization of the Scores Combination for the Taxonomically Informed Scoring

In order to establish the optimal scores to be applied for each of the taxonomic distances (family, genus and species), the information related to candidate annotations was artificially degraded.
For this, the annotation dataset returned by the ISDB-DNP approach against the benchmarking dataset was randomized.
The randomized annotation dataset was then split into four equal blocks.
For the first three blocks, the biological source information was deleted, respectively, at the species level; at the genus and species level; and, finally, at the family, genus and species levels.
The fourth block was not modified.
Finally, the four blocks were merged back to a unique dataset.
The process was repeated four times yielding four datasets with randomly incomplete biological sources.
The taxonomic distance informed scoring process was compiled to a unique function taking three arguments (scores given when a match was found at the family, genus and species level, respectively) and outputting the number of correct hits ranked at the first position.
A parallelizable Bayesian optimization algorithm (https://github.com/AnotherSamWilson/ParBayesianOptimization) was then used, being particularly suited for the optimization of black box functions for which no formal representation is available (arXiv:1807.02811).
The bounds were set between 0 and 3 for the exploration of the three parameters of the function.
Number of initial points was set to 10 and the number of iterations to 100.
Parameter kappa (κ) was set to 5.152, to force the algorithm to explore unknown areas.
The chosen acquisition function was set to Expected Improvement (ei).
Epsilon parameter (ε, eps) was set to 0.
The whole procedure was run 4 times on the 4 randomized datasets.
Best set of parameters were then averaged across the 16 results set.
All codes required for this optimization step are available online (3_taxo_optimizer.Rmd) at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer. 


### Chemical Analysis and Isolation of Compounds From Glaucium Extract

#### Plant Material

The aerial flowering parts of three Glaucium species were collected in May and June of 2015 from the northern part of Iran including Mazandaran and Tehran provinces.
The samples were identified by Dr. Ali Sonboli, Medicinal Plants and Drugs Research Institute, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran.
The voucher specimens MPH-2351 for G. grandiflorum (vernacular Shaghayegh goldrosht), MPH-2352 for G. fimbrilligerum (vernacular Shaghayegh sharabeie) and MPH-2353 for G. corniculatum (vernacular Shaghayegh shakhdar or red horned poppy) have been deposited at the Herbarium of Medicinal Plants and Drugs Research Institute (HMPDRI), Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran.

#### Mass Spectrometry Analysis

Chromatographic separation was performed on a Waters Acquity UPLC system interfaced to a Q-Exactive Focus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), using a heated electrospray ionization (HESI-II) source.
Thermo Scientific Xcalibur 3.1 software was used for instrument control.
The LC conditions were as follows: column, Waters BEH C18 50 × 2.1 mm, 1.7 μm; mobile phase, (A) water with 0.1% formic acid; (B) acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; flow rate, 600 μl·min−1; injection volume, 6 μl; gradient, linear gradient of 5−100% B over 7 min and isocratic at 100% B for 1 min.
The optimized HESI-II parameters were as follows: source voltage, 3.5 kV (pos); sheath gas flow rate (N2), 55 units; auxiliary gas flow rate, 15 units; spare gas flow rate, 3.0; capillary temperature, 350.00°C, S-Lens RF Level, 45.
The mass analyzer was calibrated using a mixture of caffeine, methionine–arginine–phenylalanine–alanine–acetate (MRFA), sodium dodecyl sulfate, sodium taurocholate, and Ultramark 1621 in an acetonitrile/methanol/water solution containing 1% formic acid by direct injection.
The data-dependent MS/MS events were performed on the three most intense ions detected in full scan MS (Top3 experiment).
The MS/MS isolation window width was 1 Da, and the stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 15, 30 and 45 units.
In data-dependent MS/MS experiments, full scans were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 FWHM (at m/z 200) and MS/MS scans at 17,500 FWHM both with an automatically determined maximum injection time.
After being acquired in a MS/MS scan, parent ions were placed in a dynamic exclusion list for 2.0 s.

#### MS Data Pretreatment

The MS data were converted from .RAW (Thermo) standard data format to .mzXML format using the MSConvert software, part of the ProteoWizard package (Chambers et al., 2012).
The converted files were treated using the MZMine software suite v. 2.38 (Pluskal et al., 2010).

The parameters were adjusted as following: the centroid mass detector was used for mass detection with the noise level set to 1.0E6 for MS level set to 1, and to 0 for MS level set to 2.
The ADAP chromatogram builder was used and set to a minimum group size of scans of 5, minimum group intensity threshold of 1.0E5, minimum highest intensity of 1.0E5 and m/z tolerance of 8.0 ppm.
For chromatogram deconvolution, the algorithm used was the wavelets (ADAP).
The intensity window S/N was used as S/N estimator with a signal to noise ratio set at 25, a minimum feature height at 10,000, a coefficient area threshold at 100, a peak duration ranges from 0.02 to 0.9 min and the RT wavelet range from 0.02 to 0.05 min.
Isotopes were detected using the isotopes peaks grouper with a m/z tolerance of 5.0 ppm, a RT tolerance of 0.02 min (absolute), the maximum charge set at 2 and the representative isotope used was the most intense.
An adduct (Na+, K+, NH4+, CH3CN+, CH3OH+, C3H8O+ (IPA+)) search was performed with the RT tolerance set at 0.1 min and the maximum relative peak height at 500%.
A complex search was also performed using [M+H]+ for ESI positive mode, with the RT tolerance set at 0.1 min and the maximum relative peak height at 500%.
Peak alignment was performed using the join aligner method (m/z tolerance at 8 ppm), absolute RT tolerance 0.065 min, weight for m/z at 10 and weight for RT at 10.
The peak list was gap-filled with the same RT and m/z range gap filler (m/z tolerance at 8 ppm).
Eventually the resulting aligned peaklist was filtered using the peak-list rows filter option in order to keep only features associated with MS2 scans.

#### Molecular Networks Generation

In order to keep the retention time, the exact mass information and to allow for the separation of isomers, a feature based molecular network (https://ccms-ucsd.github.io/GNPSDocumentation/featurebasedmolecularnetworking/) was created using the .mgf file resulting from the MZMine pretreatment step detailed above.
Spectral data was uploaded on the GNPS molecular networking platform.
A network was then created where edges were filtered to have a cosine score above 0.7 and more than six matched peaks.
Further edges between two nodes were kept in the network if and only if each of the nodes appeared in each other’s respective top 10 most similar nodes.
The spectra in the network were then searched against GNPS’ spectral libraries.
All matches kept between network spectra and library spectra were required to have a score above 0.7 and at least six matched peaks.
The output was visualised using Cytoscape 3.6 software (Shannon et al., 2003).
The GNPS job parameters and resulting data are available at the following address (https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=a475a78d9ae8484b904bcad7a16abd1f).


#### Taxonomically Informed Metabolite Annotation

The spectral file (.mgf) and attributes metadata (.clustersummary) obtained after the MN step were annotated using the ISDB-DNP with the following parameters: parent mass tolerance 0.005 Da, minimum cosine score 0.2, maximal number of returned candidates: 50.
An R script was written to proceed to the taxonomically informed scoring on GNPS outputs and return an attribute table which can be directly loaded in Cytoscape.
The script is available online (taxo_scorer_user.Rmd) at https://github.com/oolonek/taxo_scorer.

#### Isolation of Predicentrine and Glaucine From G. grandiflorum

The air-dried, ground and powdered plant materials (500 g) was successively extracted by solvents of increasing polarities (hexane, ethyl acetate and methanol), 4 × 5.0 L of each solvent (48 h).
An aliquot of each ethyl acetate and methanolic extract was submitted to C18 SPE (eluted with 100% MeOH), dried under nitrogen flow and redissolved at 5 mg/ml in MeOH for LC–MS analysis.
The methanolic extract of G. grandiflorum was concentrated under reduced pressure, then dried with a nitrogen flow until complete evaporation of the residual solvent yielding 50 g of extract.
An aliquot (5 g) was subjected to a VLC in order to eliminate sugars and other very polar compounds. A 250 ml sintered-glass Buchner funnel connected to a vacuum line was packed with a C18 reverse phase LiChroprep 40–63 μm (Lobar Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
After conditioning the stationary phase with methanol (4 × 250 ml, 0.1% formic acid) and distilled water (4 × 250 ml, 0.1% formic acid), 5 g of methanolic extract was dissolved in water and the mixture was deposited on the stationary phase.
Elution of the sample was conducted using water (4 × 250 ml, 0.1% formic acid) in the first step and followed by methanol (4 × 250 ml, 0.1% formic acid) in the second step.
This process yielded 1.4 g of processed methanolic extract.
After condition optimisation at the analytical level, 50 mg of the extract were solubilized in 500 µl DMSO and injected using a Rheodyne® valve (1 ml loop).
Semi-preparative HPLC-UV purification was performed on a Shimadzu system equipped with: LC20A module elution pumps, an SPD-20A UV/VIS detector, a 7725I Rheodyne® injection valve, and a FRC-10A fraction collector (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The HPLC system was controlled by the LabSolutions software.
The HPLC conditions were selected as follows: Waters X-Bridge C18 column (250 × 19 mm i.d., 5 μm) equipped with a Waters C18 pre-column cartridge holder (10 × 19 mm i.d.); solvent system consists of ACN (2 mM TEA) (B) and H2O (2 mM TEA & 2 mM ammonium acetate) (A).
Optimized separation condition from the analytical was transferred to semi-preparative scale by a geometric gradient transfer software (Guillarme et al., 2008).
The separation was conducted in gradient elution mode as follows: 5% B in 0–5 min, 12% B in 5–10 min, 30% B in 10–30 min, 60% B in 30–55 min, 100% B in 55–65 min. The column was reconditioned by equilibration with 5% of B in 15 min.
Flow rate was equal to 17 ml/min and UV traces were recorded at 210 nm and 280 nm.
The separation procedure yielded 0.3 mg of predicentrine and 3.4 mg of glaucine.
Spectra for predicentrine (CCMSLIB00005436122) and glaucine (CCMSLIB00005436123) were deposited on GNPS servers.

#### NMR Analysis

The NMR spectra of each isolated compound was recorded on a Bruker BioSpin 600 MHz spectrometer (Avance Neo 600).
Chemical shifts (δ) were recorded in parts per million in methanol‒d4 with TMS as an internal standard.
NMR data are available as Supplementary Material S1 and S2.

