## Evaluation of Annotation Methods Through International Contests {.page_break_before}

Interlaboratory comparisons and exchanges help scientists improve their methods and results.
In the frame of [MS](#ms)-based annotation, progress and limitations in computational annotation methods for annotating [LC](#lc)-[HR](#hr)[MS](#ms) are periodically benchmarked during the Critical Assessment of Small Molecule Identification ([CASMI](#casmi)) contest (<http://casmi-contest.org/>).
The contest was founded in 2012 to provide scientists with a common open dataset to evaluate their [MS](#ms)-based annotation methods [@doi:10.3390/metabo3020412].
Since its introduction ten years ago, it promoted the emergence of computational methods for different tasks relevant to annotation, including identification of the ion form (adducts, isotopologues, multimers), molecular formula, as well as putative structural annotation.
Several edition took place since then, the last one in 2022.

### [Critical Assessment of Small Molecule Identification](https://fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/casmi/casmi-2022-results) (2022)

To make this [CASMI](#casmi) edition similar to an actual metabolomics study, the organizers provided raw LC-accurate mass MS/MS data in both [PI](#pi) and [NI](#ni) mode, with a list of 500 compounds and their retention times and accurate [*m/z*](#mz) values.
Compounds were not included in public libraries and comprised both metabolites and exposome chemicals.
250 priority compounds and 250 challenges were provided, and for the first time, chemical class annotation was included.

For this edition, in collaboration with Kai Dürkhop, Robin Schmid, and Louis-Felix Nothias, we designed and tested a novel computational pipeline integrating Sirius [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btac260], [GNPS](#gnps) [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3597], [TIMA](#tima) [@doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.01329; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.6582188], and MASST (Mass Spectrometry Search Tool) [@doi:10.1038/s41538-022-00137-3].

Preliminary results showed that for 246 challenges, our strategy top-performed by proposing the correct answer at the first rank for 93% of adducts, 94% [MF](#mf)s, 26% [2D](#dd) structures, and 69% chemical classes.
Leveraging the strengths of each tool together, it was the first time that computational methods performed better than manual expert annotation at all tasks.

### [Lockdown Mass Spec Challenge](https://cenapt.pharm.uic.edu/2020/08/18/The-Lockdown-Mass-Spec-Challenge-Results/) (2021)

In 2021, the UIC Botanical Center and the CENAPT Center organized *The Lockdown Mass Spec Challenge*.
The challenge followed the model used in the previous rounds of the [CASMI](#casmi) contests. 
Participants were provided a set of 16 [MS](#ms) and [MS/MS](#msms) spectra and asked participants to deduce the structure of compounds based on the provided data.
The compounds were derived from plants and included both known and unknown compounds.
The unknown compounds were either unreported natural products or semi-synthetic analogs of known natural products.
For the first time, metadata included origins of the compounds.
Chromatographic data were also provided.
Participants could use any approach to arrive at the structures.

Despite the relatively small number of challenges, a semi-automatic approach was used.
The results from Sirius, MSFinder and [ISDB](#isdb) were combined and taxonomically weighted.
Candidates were then re-ordered according to their mean of their rank for each annotation tool used.
This approach obtained the best results of the contest.
The detailed results are available in Appendix @sec:appendix-ci-lockdown.
