# Automated Comprehensive Compositional Assessment {#sec:cascade .page_break_before}

## Foreword {.unnumbered}

As the annotation challenges have been addressed in previous chapters, this chapter focuses on assigning universal semi-quantitative attributes to the broadest possible range of compounds.
To this end, a charged aerosol detector ([CAD](#cad)) was coupled to an Orbitrap platform used in previous chapters for raw extract analyses.
This installation, composed of an Acquity [UHPLC](#uhplc), an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Focus and a [CAD](#cad), was the first in Europe.
While the technical coupling of the two detectors is almost trivial, automatic solutions to link the two signals are required.

The following chapter presents methodological developments to link [MS](#ms) features to [CAD](#cad) peaks, with the aim of compensating for quantification problems associated with electrospray ionization when used for a generic semi-quantitative estimation of all detected compounds.
Building on previously developed tools, coupled with other state-of-the-art open solutions, 
[MS](#ms) features are informed in two ways.
First, they are informed in the context of a chromatographic peak.
Second, they are informed in the context of a spectral table.
In addition, [MS](#ms) features can be informed by a biological or chemical taxonomy.
Finally, the confidence of the annotation can be estimated.

The result is an automated comprehensive compositional assessment workflow that can be used to guide isolation efforts by providing semi-quantitative data on peaks of interest or help to rapidly provide qualitative and semi-quantitative metabolite profiles to assist, for example, in the registration of new natural ingredients.

To improve the reading flow of the thesis, it is presented in chapter form.

<!-- \newpage -->