## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Recent developments in mass spectrometry-based metabolite profiling allow unprecedented qualitative coverage of plant extract composition [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0740-8].
However, the electrospray ionization used in metabolite profiling generates multiple artefactual signals for a single analyte [@doi:10.1002/jms.3345].
This leads to thousands of signals per analysis, without satisfactory means of filtering which ones correspond to abundant constituents of the extract.
Generic approaches allowing to annotate both qualitatively and quantitatively a broad range of relevant constituents are therefore needed.
For this, we combine liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry with Charged Aerosol Detection (CAD).
The deconvoluted features are grouped and annotated using state-of-the-art tools [@doi:10.1038/s41467-021-23953-9; @doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0344-8; @doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.01329].
After peak-shape comparison, those annotations are attributed to their corresponding extracted and integrated CAD peak.
The result of this approach for an ethanolic extract of Swertia chirayita (Roxb.) H.Karst. is illustrated in the figure below.
The resulting re-constituted chromatogram is colored according to the corresponding chemical superclasses of the spectra.
Signals not attributed to CAD peaks correspond to minor metabolites, annotated the same way.
Data from the major metabolome is displayed as relative CAD area and the minor metabolome is displayed as the number of occurrences.
The automated compositional assessment provides visual ways to organize annotation at both major and minor metabolome levels, together with a detailed report including relevant orthogonal information (taxonomy, retention time).
This generic qualitative and quantitative approach paves the way to automatically assess the composition on single natural extracts of interest or broader collections, thus facilitating new ingredients registration or natural extract-based drug discovery campaigns.
