#### Introduction {.page_break_before}

Recent developments in metabolomics and untargeted analyses allow unprecedented qualitative coverage.
The automation and portability of analyses were also dramatically improved.
This now allows to obtain structural information on a great percentage of the acquired signal.
While these developments are crucial for better qualitative characterization of any samples, quantification remains limited to a few compounds.
Accurate quantification is a tedious process that requires high quality (deuterated) standards, which makes it unavailable at a large scale.
This is a major drawback of current untargeted approaches, as a great portion of the annotated (qualified) signals is not linked to any quantity.
Given the sensitivity reached with modern MS instruments, questions about the relevance of some of the acquired signals can appear.
Indeed, among all signals considered within an analysis, the majority is artefactual and one single "analyte" can lead to tenths of features.
This is even worse for very rich matrices such as plant extracts, as a single analysis can suggest hundreds to thousands of analytes, without satisfying means to filter which ones are "real", or do represent a significant amount of the extract mass.
Therefore, despite many advantages, untargeted analyses are still not used routinely, because of the inability to decipher relevant information.
Possible ways to overcome the latter would be to rapidly estimate the confidence in a given annotation and link it to an approximated quantity.
While SIRIUS team brought game-changing tools allowing to annotate at different granularity levels and measure confidence, those still remain qualitative only.
It appears thus crucial to develop methodologies to obtain a less accurate quantification, but on a broader range of signals.
Some approaches tried to address this issue by including internal standards of various chemical families to extrapolate ionization of signals attributed to those families.
Multiple other approaches were developed but still suffer from the intrinsic limitations of LC-ESI-MS.
Therefore, hyphenation with other types of detectors appeared as a way to simultaneously overcome those limitations and capture additional information.
A first improvement was made by the hyphenation of LC-MS platforms with PDA detectors.
More recently, so-called "universal detectors" such as ELSD and CAD were introduced to also detect compounds without chromophores.
Such hyphenation exists already for decades in GC field, with  GC-FID-MS platforms.
While the resolution of GC is intrinsically greater than the one of LC, allowing for such approaches, current UHPLC platforms approach a satisfying peak capacity.

Our work thus aims at contextualizing the abundant qualitative information coming from current untargeted analyses pipelines and link it to universal quantitative attributes, together with other orthogonal information.
These developments will help in a contextualized automated assessment of natural extracts, saving human time for more challenging tasks.

TODO

Help understanding major/minor not only for biological impact but also isolation efforts.
