## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Recent developments in metabolomics and untargeted Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analyses allow unprecedented qualitative coverage [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0740-8].
Automation and throughput of analyses have also been significantly improved [@doi:10.1016/j.cca.2015.08.027]. 
While these developments are crucial for better qualitative characterization of any sample, quantification remains limited to a few compounds [@doi:10.1038/s41598-020-62573-z].
Accurate quantification is a tedious process that requires high-quality standards, making it unavailable on a large scale [@doi:10.1039/C6AN01753C].
Furthermore, although highly sensitive, LC-MS is not a universal detection technique [@doi:10.1002/mas.20329].
Given the sensitivity achieved by modern MS instruments, questions arise about the relevance of some of the acquired signals [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b02380].
Indeed, of all the signals considered in an LC-MS analysis, the majority are chemical adducts or fragments created during the ionization process and a single "analyte" can lead to dozens of features [@doi:10.1002/jms.3345].
This is especially true for LC-ESI-MS, where some compounds can exhibit very large differences in their ionization behavior [@doi:10.1055/s-0028-1088393].
This is a major drawback of current untargeted LC-MS approaches, as a large fraction of the annotated (qualified) signals is not linked to any unbiased semi-quantitative information.
This is even worse for very rich matrices such as plant extracts, as a single analysis can suggest hundreds or thousands of features/analytes [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.01.001], without satisfactory means of filtering out those that are significant, or that represent a substantial amount of the extracted mass.

Despite many advantages in terms of sensitivity and metabolome coverage, untargeted LC-MS analyses are not yet widely adopted for natural extract compositional assessment, due to the inability to decipher relevant information.
It, therefore, seems crucial to develop methodologies that provide semi-quantitative information on a wide range of signals, rather than single compounds, and that estimate annotation confidence.

Below is a brief overview of current solutions for each of these aspects.

### Spectral Networking

The introduction of Feature-based Molecular Networking (FBMN) was a major step in deciphering the huge amount of data generated by MS-based metabolomic approaches [@doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0933-6].
While spectral matching of features to spectral libraries had already existed for a long time [@doi:10/d8js78], calculating the spectral similarity between features to organize and visualize them into spectral families has greatly facilitated the chemical study of complex samples [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1203689109].
Further recent improvements have been made by Ion Identity Networking (IIN) [@doi:10.1038/s41467-021-23953-9], and by linking positive ionization (PI) and negative ionization (NI) modes [@doi:10.1101/2021.12.21.473622].

### Confidence in Annotation

Recently, Sirius [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0344-8] integrated multiple subtools in its ecosystem.
First, a Support Vector Machine (SVM) approach was developed to estimate the confidence of metabolites absent from spectral libraries [@doi:10.1038/s41587-021-01045-9].
The performance was then improved using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btac260].

Another complementary taxonomy-based confidence scoring method was also developed in-house [@doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.01329].
Together, these approaches can facilitate the filtering of highly trusted annotations only.
Such annotations, even if at a lower confidence level than internal libraries of standards [@doi:10.1021/es5002105], can be used as additional anchor points before further investigation.

### Generic Quantitation of Multiple Components

In MS, some approaches have also attempted to include optimally selected internal standards from various chemical families to extrapolate the ionization of signals attributed to these compound types [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-8-93].
These approaches remain study specific and still require the use of standards without completely overcoming the intrinsic limitations of compound ionization specificity.
Therefore, the use of hyphenation with other types of detectors has emerged as a way to simultaneously partly overcome these limitations and capture additional complementary information.
A first improvement was made by coupling LC-MS platforms with PDA detectors, allowing the recording of UV spectra [@doi:10.1021/np4004307].
More recently, so-called "universal" detectors such as Evaporative Light Scattering Detector (ELSD) [@doi:10.1021/np4009706] and Charged Aerosol Detector (CAD) [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2010.04.047] have been introduced to additionally detect compounds without chromophores and provide a detection response that should ideally not be compound specific.
Hyphenation with quantitative detectors has already existed for decades in the field of gas chromatography (GC), with the GC-Flame Ionization Detector(FID)-MS platforms [@doi:10.1007/s00216-013-6704-9].
GC-FID is, however, limited to the analysis of volatile constituents only.
CAD, ELSD, and FID are mono-dimensional detectors. 
They provide intensities over time, without additional spectroscopic dimensions such as UV-PDA or MS detection.
Therefore, a greater chromatographic resolution is needed for those detectors, as the data can not be deconvoluted thanks to the additional specificity brought by the spectroscopic third dimension.
Thus with ELSD or CAD, ideally, to achieve unambiguous semi-quantitation, all peaks should be baseline-separated, without any co-elution.
For FID, the chromatographic resolution of GC is inherently higher than that of HPLC, allowing for such approximations.
In LC, achieving very high chromatographic resolution remains a challenge, but current UHPLC platforms have reached a satisfactory peak capacity current UHPLC platforms have reached satisfactory peak capacity [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2009.05.069].
LC-FID developments exist, but are not yet mature, and face multiple solvent-related challenges [@doi:10.1016/j.trac.2018.10.038].

### Aims 

This work, therefore, aims to make sense of the abundant qualitative information from current untargeted LC-MS analysis pipelines and link it to universal semi-quantitative information, as well as other complementary metadata, such as taxonomy.
Such developments should facilitate an automated comprehensive assessment of natural extract composition.
The idea is to provide metabolite profiling data of natural extracts sorted by semi-quantitative information that allows for differentiation between compounds belonging to major or minor plant metabolomes.
Further, by grouping related features, the massive amount of MS data is narrowed down to meaningful information for each LC peak.
This is meant to facilitate the interpretation of the data. 
Such workflow and reporting mainly prepare the data for final inspection and further targeted confirmation.

We believe this workflow will be particularly useful to extract meaningful compositional data for the registration of botanical ingredients and to guide the efficient isolation of new NPs.
