## Conclusion {.page_break_before}

The recent developments in mass spectrometry-based metabolite profiling generate huge amounts of high-quality data.
Processing and effectively exploiting this data can be highly challenging.
The workflow presented here aims to compensate for issues related to electrospray ionization by hyphenating so called "universal" detectors such as [ELSD](#elsd) or [CAD](#cad) to [LC](#lc)-[MS](#ms) profiling platforms.
This should help to partially automate the compositional assessment of natural extracts and decipher the data to make informed decisions.

While our efforts were focused on the automation of the confidence in the annotation and peak-shape similarity calculation, some improvements in the quantitation could be envisioned.

A first possible improvement towards more accurate quantitation could come from the implementation of an inverse elution gradient.
Indeed, the proportion of organic solvent has a considerable effect on the detector response [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2013.07.111; @doi:10.1002/9781119390725.ch4].
This could also be corrected by using algorithmics, such as suggested by [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2010.09.056; @doi:10.1021/ac060078j].

However, the proportion of organic solvent is not the only parameter to take into account for improving the precision and accuracy of the quantitation [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2011.01.062].
Even if [ELSD](#elsd) and [CAD](#cad) are often considered to respond universally, non-neglectable differences have been observed depending on the chemical structures studied [@doi:10.1186/s13321-021-00532-0].
In addition, [CAD](#cad) response is non-linear and uses a power function that has to be taken into account [@doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2020.461844; @doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2019.04.017].
Another limitation is the chromatographic resolution needed.
Indeed, high peak capacities are required to achieve good results.

With those limitations taken into account, we believe our workflow will be particularly useful to mine meaningful natural extract's compositional data.
This should facilitate for the registration of botanical ingredients and help the targeted isolation of new [NP](#np)s.

\newpage