## Materials and Methods {.page_break_before}

### Plant material

The aerial parts of *S. chirayita* were furnished by Tradall SA (Batch 155174).

### Extraction

1.1kg of plant material was homogenized in a grinder and extracted at room temperature with 5kg H~2~O and 6kg EtOH for 4 days.
The extract was then filtered and stored in inox for decantation for 10 days.
Finally, the extract was concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
From 1.1kg of plant material, 86.3g of dried extract was obtained.

### Vacuum Liquid Chromatography (VLC)

The first fractionation of the extract was undertaken by Vacuum Liquid Chromatography (VLC).
10g of extract mixed with 20g of silica were loaded on a chromatographic system made of two layers of silica (50g and 200g) separated by sand.
This system was first very gently (approximately 2 drops/sec) eluted with 3x500mL 100% H2O and then 3x500mL 100% EtOH.
The aqueous and ethanolic parts were collected separately, with a “mix” part corresponding to the dead volume of the system between both and the system washed with DCM.
All VLC fractions were then concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
This procedure was repeated 3 times.
From the initial 30g of extract, a total of 27.4g were recovered (91.3%). Mass of VLC_1 (H~2~O) was 12.4g, VLC_2 (mix) was 4.2g, VLC_3 (EtOH) was 10.4g and VLC_4 (wash) 0.3g.

### Data Acquisition {#sec:mm-da}

Chromatographic separation was performed on a Waters Acquity UPLC system interfaced to a Corona^TM^ Veo^TM^ RS Charged Aerosol Detector (CAD) and a Q-Exactive Focus mass spectrometer, using a heated electrospray ionization (HESI-II) source.
Thermo Scientific Xcalibur 3.1 software was used for instrument control.
The LC conditions were as follows: column, Waters [BEH](#beh) C~18~ 150 × 2.1 mm, 1.7 *μ*m; mobile phase, (A) water with 0.1% formic acid; (B) acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; flow rate, 400 *μ*l·min^−1^; injection volume, 6 *μ*l; gradient, isocratic at 5% B for 0.5 min linear gradient of 5−100% B over 126.5 min and isocratic at 100% B for 12 min.
The optimized HESI-II parameters were as follows: source voltage, 3.5 kV (pos); sheath gas flow rate (N2), 55 units; auxiliary gas flow rate, 15 units; spare gas flow rate, 3.0; capillary temperature, 350.00°C, S-Lens RF Level, 45.
The mass analyzer was calibrated using a mixture of caffeine, methionine–arginine–phenylalanine–alanine–acetate (MRFA), sodium dodecyl sulfate, sodium taurocholate, and Ultramark 1621 in an acetonitrile/methanol/water solution containing 1% formic acid by direct injection.
The data-dependent MS/MS events were performed on the three most intense ions detected in full scan MS (Top3 experiment).
The MS/MS isolation window width was 1 Da, and the stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 15, 30 and 45 units.
In data-dependent MS/MS experiments, full scans were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 FWHM (at *m/z* 200) and MS/MS scans at 17,500 FWHM both with an automatically determined maximum injection time.
After being acquired in a MS/MS scan, parent ions were placed in a dynamic exclusion list for 2.0 s.
A custom exclusion list described in Section @sec:ci was used.
An Acquity UPLC photodiode array detector was used to acquire UV spectra which were detected from 200 to 500 nm. 
An analytical split was used with a split ratio of 9:1 (CAD:MS).
CAD parameters were: evaporation temperature at 40 °C, 5 bar N2 and power function 1.

### Data Conversion {#sec:mm-dc}

All raw data files were converted using ThermoRawFileParser [v.1.4.0](https://github.com/compomics/ThermoRawFileParser/releases/tag/v1.4.0) [@doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00328].
The generic command used was:
`mono ThermoRawFileParser.exe -d $DIRECTORY --allDetectors --format=2`

### Data Processing {#sec:mm-dp}

#### Signals pretreatment

Manual investigation after the coupling of the different detectors to the LC measured that the MS signal was delayed by 0.090 and 0.055 minutes in comparison to the one of the PDA and the CAD, respectively.
These values were used to align the signals.

To perform the Fourier transform, the `filterFFT` function from the nucleR package [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr345] was used.
Fourier components were set to 0.01.
Signal sharpening was performed as described in [@doi:10.1016/j.talanta.2018.09.048], with implementation of the function in R (see <https://github.com/Adafede/cascade/blob/main/R/signal_sharpening.R>).

#### Charged Aerosol Detector (CAD) Data

Peaks were detected and integrated using the `findpeaks` function from the PRACMA package [@borchersPracmaPracticalNumerical2022].
Threshold was set to 0.001.

#### MS-Features Extraction & Ion Identity Networking

MS features were extracted and informed using MZmine3 v.3.1.0-beta [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-395].
All parameters were given in the form of an xml file using the batch mode.
The details of the xml file are available in Appendix @sec:appendix-cascade-3.
The template xml file was filled with filename and MS mode using a custom bash script available in Appendix @sec:appendix-cascade-4.
Adducts used for the different IIN steps are included in the file. 

#### Feature-Based Molecular Network (FBMN)

In order to keep the retention time, the exact mass information and to allow for the separation of isomers, a feature based molecular network (<https://ccms-ucsd.github.io/GNPSDocumentation/featurebasedmolecularnetworking/>) was created using the .mgf file resulting from the MZMine pretreatment step detailed above.
When not specified, default parameters were used.
A network was then created where edges were filtered to have a cosine score above 0.6 and more than six matched peaks.
Further edges between two nodes were kept in the network if and only if each of the nodes appeared in each other’s respective top 20 most similar nodes.
The maximum shift between precursors was set to 500Da.
The maximum component size was set to 0.
IIN edges were added as supplementary pairs.
The spectra in the network were then searched against GNPS’ spectral libraries.
All matches kept between network spectra and library spectra were required to have a score above 0.7 and at least six matched peaks.
The output was visualised using Cytoscape 3.9.1 software [@doi:10.1101/gr.1239303].
The GNPS job parameters and resulting data are available at the following addresses: [fd78b0a89d6d40168fc43d5f13f71688](https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=fd78b0a89d6d40168fc43d5f13f71688) for positive and [033b5dcf471641c09907704696b82bb0](https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=033b5dcf471641c09907704696b82bb0) for negative.

#### MS-Features Annotation 

##### Sirius

Sirius annotations were performed in batch mode using Sirius 5.7.0.
The details of the BASH files used for submission are available in Appendix @sec:appendix-cascade-5.

##### GNPS

GNPS annotations were retrieved from the jobs previously described.

##### ISDB

The in silico libraries in positive and negative modes were generated as described in Section @sec:ci.
The SMILES used were coming from [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.6378223].
CFM4 was used for in silico fragmentation [@doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.1c01465].
parameters are available at <https://github.com/mandelbrot-project/spectral_lib_builder>.
In silico spectral matching was performed using [spectral_lib_matcher](https://github.com/mandelbrot-project/spectral_lib_matcher), based on the matchms library [@doi:10.21105/joss.02411].
Parent mass and MS/MS tolerances were 0.01Da, the similarity method used `ModifedCosine`, the minimum score and minimum peaks set to 0.

##### Taxonomically Informed Metabolite Annotation

Taxonomically Informed Metabolite Annotation was performed using all the above mentioned inputs.
It was performed using TIMA v2.5.5 [@doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.01329; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.6929297].
All parameters were the default ones.

#### Link Between CAD and MS Data

The extracted MS feature list was re-used in R to extract exact MS peak shapes and compare them to the CAD peak shapes using different function from the MSnBase package [@doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00313; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr645].

### Literature Matching

Compounds were retrieved from Wikidata as described in [@doi:10.7554/eLife.70780].
The template of the query used is available at <https://github.com/Adafede/wd-np-up-to-date/>.
Only references published between 1900 and 2022 were kept.
Only compounds with an exact mass between 150 and 1500 Da and a logP between -1 and 6 were kept.
