# Linking Comprehensive Compositional Assessment to Bioactivity {#sapid .page_break_before}

## Foreword {.unnumbered}

As announced earlier, the *comprehensive compositional assessment* was developed not only to get the best possible view of the composition, but also to estimate the relative quantity of the annotated metabolites.
This is of particular relevance for bioactivity evaluation.

The following chapter illustrates how compositional data obtained with the methods presented in the previous chapters can be linked to bioactivity data.

First, this link could be illustrated in an article published in the *Journal of Natural Products* [@doi:10.1021/acs.jnatprod.2c00146], in collaboration with the University of Basel.
The abstract of this co-authored article is available in Appendix @sec:melanoma.
Based on an initial high content screening of 2,576 plant extracts aimed at discovering [NP](#np)s targeting oncogenic signaling in melanoma [@doi:10.1021/acs.jnatprod.1c01154], 8 extracts of *Artemisia* and *Hyptis* spp. were selected for further study.
[HPLC](#hplc)-based activity profiling was combined with advanced [UHPLC](#uhplc)-[HR](#hr)[MS/MS](#ms) metabolite profiling to leverage the information obtained from both approaches.
This allowed an efficient integration of [MS](#ms)-based annotation to highlight bioactive compounds and their analogs across extracts and fractions.
This approach led to the isolation of twelve compounds active in the low micromolar range.
While semi-quantitative information was combined with bioactivity results of each fraction in the resulting [MN](#mn), it was still done manually.

A second approach taking advantage of the workflow presented in Chapter @sec:cascade was developed to assess another type of bioactivity.
It was performed with an ethanolic extract of *S. chirayita*, an important medicinal and industrial bitter plant, with the aim to evaluate the contribution of chemical compounds to the overall taste of the extract.
Due in part to restrictions on tastings during the pandemic, this chapter presents only preliminary results of this approach.
While further research will be needed to fully understand the complex mechanisms behind the extract's unique bitter taste, the underlying methodology is already presented since in illustrates well how organoleptic results can be correlated to comprehensive compositional assessment automatically.

Part of the content is adapted from a poster presented in 2021-09, at the 69th International Congress and Annual Meeting of the Society for Medicinal Plant and Natural Product Research, online [@doi:10.1055/s-0041-1736968].

\newpage