### Materials and Methods {.page_break_before}

`//TODO`{.red}

#### Chemicals

`//TODO`{.red}

#### Plant material

The aerial parts of *S. chirayita* were furnished by Tradall SA (Batch 155174).

`//TODO`{.red}

#### Extraction

1.1kg of plant material was homogenized in a grinder and extracted at room temperature with 5kg H~2~O and 6kg [EtOH](#etoh) for 4 days.
The extract was then filtered and stored in inox for decantation for 10 days.
Finally, the extract was concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
From 1.1kg of plant material, 86.3g of dried extract was obtained.

#### Fractionation

##### Vacuum Liquid Chromatography

The first fractionation of the extract was undertaken by Vacuum Liquid Chromatography ([VLC](#vlc)).
10g of extract mixed with 20g of silica were loaded on a chromatographic system made of two layers of silica (50g and 200g) separated by sand.
This system was first very gently (approximately 2 drops/sec) eluted with 3x500mL 100% H2O and then 3x500mL 100% [EtOH](#etoh).
The aqueous and ethanolic parts were collected separately, with a “mix” part corresponding to the dead volume of the system between both and the system washed with DCM.
All [VLC](#vlc) fractions were then concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
This procedure was repeated 3 times.
From the initial 30g of extract, a total of 27.4g were recovered (91.3%). Mass of VLC_1 (H~2~O) was 12.4g, VLC_2 (mix) was 4.2g, VLC_3 ([EtOH](#etoh)) was 10.4g and VLC_4 (wash) 0.3g.

##### Medium-Pressure Liquid Chromatography

10g of VLC_3 were mixed with 20g of Zeoprep® C~18~ (40–63*μ*m, BGB) and filled in an aluminum cartridge.
Fractionation was performed using a Buchi 681 pump equipped with a Knauer UV detector and a 460 × 70 mm i.d. column loaded with Zeoprep® C~18~ as stationary phase (15–25*μ*m, BGB).
Fractionation was performed at a flow rate of 20ml/min using a solvent mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in methanol (eluent B) and the following gradient: 0min, 5% B; held for 37min at 5%B; increased within 600 min to 100% B; washed at 100% B.
The column effluent was fractionated each 250mL into 82 sub-fractions (M01–M82).
The sub-fractions were then concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
From the initial 10g of VLC_3, a total of 7.8g were recovered (77.8%).

#### Liquid Chromatography - High-Resolution Tandem Mass Spectrometry analysis/es

`//TODO`{.red}

#### Nuclear Magnetic Resonance analysis/es

[NMR](#nmr) experiments (^1^H, ^13^C, and [2D](#dd)) were performed using a Bruker® Avance III HD 600 (14,1 Tesla) instrument (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten,Germany) with trimethylsilane ([TMS](#tms)) as internal standard.
The [NMR](#nmr) data was pre-processed using MestReNova software (version 12.0.1; Mestrelab, Santiago de Compostela, Spain).

#### Sensory analyses

##### Panel

The tasting panel included X female and X male participants.
The panelists were trained in sensory evaluation once a week for X to X years, depending on the participant, before participating in this study.
These panelists were primarily trained on wine but they were used to taste other products.
Sensory sessions were run for X weeks (once a week) and the number of panelists varied from X to X per session.
Specific training was done for this study. 

`//TODO`{.red}

Describe … . 

##### Organization

The distribution of the samples was done according to proton [NMR](#nmr) clustering of the samples.
7 groups were formed by hierarchical clustering to get a reasonable number of samples per session and number of sessions.
A cluster was tasted per week.
Additionally to the samples of the clusters, panelists were asked to evaluate a Chasselas wine before and after tasting, in order to assess the taste modulating properties of the cluster.

##### Sample preparation

To minimize saturation and own ethanol tasting properties, all samples were dissolved in demineralized water.
To avoid solubility issues, all samples were first prepared in a 60% [EtOH](#etoh) stock solution at 10mg/mL and then diluted in water according to Supplementary X.

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Working concentration

To evaluate appropriate working concentration, a first session was dedicated to VLC_3 tasting (ethanolic fraction).
After tasting, the working concentration for all experiments was established at 3mg/L, multiplied by the mass contribution of the Medium Pressure Liquid Chromatography ([MPLC](#mplc)) fraction to the VLC_3 fraction.
See Supplementary X.
For clusters X and X, working concentration was divided by X as they were known to contain extremely bitter compounds.

`//TODO`{.red}

##### “Napping” analysis

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Taste profile analysis

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Taste modulation analysis

Chasselas

`//TODO`{.red}

#### Data analysis

##### [LC](#lc)-HRMS/MS

`//TODO`{.red}

##### [NMR](#nmr)

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Sensory

`//TODO`{.red}

##### Multiple Factor Analysis

`//TODO`{.red}
