### Conclusion {.page_break_before}

To identify the compounds responsible for the taste of an ethanolic of *S. chirayita*, analytical and sensory experiments were performed, both in an untargeted manner.
The extract was fractionated to get a more detailed view of its composition.
By taking advantage of the *automated compositional assessment* developed in Chapter @sec:cascade, an overview of the chemical composition could be obtained. This allowed the taste-active molecules to be effectively disentangled and their contribution to the overall taste of the extract to be assessed.
Different secoiridoids contributed to the bitter taste of the extract, mainly amarogentin and amaroswerin.
In addition to these highly bitter molecules, other minor compounds contributed to the overall taste of the extract\footnotemark{}.
\footnotetext{Some dimers of xanthones formed after extraction had impressive silky mouth feeling.}
Taste modulating experiments were performed, with some fractions showing taste modulating activity.

Further research, such as taste reconstitution and omission experiments [@doi:10.1021/jf053131y; @doi:10/db9825], should be performed to strengthen the results.
In the case of rich matrices, these experiments are challenging, as it is almost impossible to achieve complete depletion and residual complexity has been shown to impact results [@doi:10.1021/acs.joc.8b00988]. 
However, the developed methodology already allows focusing efforts to find novel compounds with interesting tasting properties, opening the door to ways to selectively extract or synthesize them later on.

Although some of the work was developed with a focus on taste, we believe that our approach will be even more successful with other biological activities with less variation.

\newpage