### Materials and Methods {.page_break_before}

Unless otherwise stated, the material and methods are the same as the ones described in Section @sec:cascade-met.
Additional methods are described hereafter.

#### Medium-Pressure Liquid Chromatography {#mmmplc}

10g of VLC_3 were mixed with 20g of Zeoprep® C~18~ (40–63*μ*m, BGB) and filled in an aluminum cartridge.
Fractionation was performed using a Buchi 681 pump equipped with a Knauer UV detector and a 460 × 70 mm i.d. column loaded with Zeoprep® C~18~ as stationary phase (15–25*μ*m, BGB).
Fractionation was performed at a flow rate of 20ml/min using a solvent mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in methanol (eluent B) and the following gradient: 0min, 5% B; held for 37min at 5%B; increased within 600 min to 100% B; washed at 100% B.
The column effluent was fractionated each 250mL into 82 sub-fractions (M01–M82).
The sub-fractions were then concentrated under reduced pressure, freeze-dried and stored at −20°C until further use.
From the initial 10g of VLC_3, a total of 7.8g were recovered (77.8%).
More details are available in Appendix @sec:sapid-appendix-masses.

#### Liquid Chromatography - High-Resolution Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis

The acquisition parameters were the same as described in @sec:cascade-met, except for the gradient length, which was reduced to 42 minutes.
Analyses were carried in positive mode only.
For this reason, were extracted using Sirius 5.7.0 (see [Features' Extraction](#features-extraction)).

#### Taste and [CAD](#cad)-informed molecular network {#sapid-mm-mn}

The parameters used to build the network were the same as in @sec:cascade-fbmn.
The [GNPS](#gnps) job [ID](#id) of the resulting [MN](#mn) is [34dd22ef9c1d4dcdbb634fe38e00b506](https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=34dd22ef9c1d4dcdbb634fe38e00b506).
Nodes were colored according to different attributes explained into more details in Appendix @sec:sapid-mn.

#### Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Analysis

[NMR](#nmr) experiments (^1^H, ^13^C, and [2D](#dd)) were performed using a Bruker® Avance III HD 600 (14,1 Tesla) instrument (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten,Germany) with trimethylsilane ([TMS](#tms)) as internal standard.
The [NMR](#nmr) data was pre-processed using MestReNova software (version 12.0.1; Mestrelab, Santiago de Compostela, Spain).

#### Sensory Analysis

##### Panel

The tasting panel included 11 female and 5 male participants.
The panelists were trained in sensory evaluation once a week for 2 to 12 years, depending on the participant, before participating in this study.
These panelists were primarily trained on wine but they were used to taste other products.
Sensory sessions were run for 10 weeks (once a week) and the number of panelists varied from 9 to 12 per session.
Specific training was done for this study.

##### Organization

The distribution of the samples was done according to proton [NMR](#nmr) clustering of the samples.
7 groups were formed by hierarchical clustering to get a reasonable number of samples per session and number of sessions.
A cluster was tasted per week.
Additionally to the samples of the clusters, panelists were asked to evaluate a Chasselas wine before and after tasting, in order to assess the taste modulating properties of the cluster.

##### Sample Preparation

To minimize saturation and own ethanol tasting properties, all samples were dissolved in demineralized water.
To avoid solubility issues, all samples were first prepared in a 60% [EtOH](#etoh) stock solution at 10mg/mL and then diluted in water.

##### Working Concentration

To evaluate appropriate working concentration, a first session was dedicated to VLC_3 tasting (ethanolic fraction).
After tasting, the working concentration for all experiments was established at 3mg/L, multiplied by the mass contribution of the Medium Pressure Liquid Chromatography ([MPLC](#mplc)) fraction to the VLC_3 fraction.
For more details, see Appendix @sec:sapid-initial.
For cluster 3, working concentration was divided by 50 as preliminary chemical analyses revealed they contained extremely bitter compounds.
For cluster 7, working concentration was multiplied by 2, as preliminary chemical analyses revealed it represented the largest amount of the extract mass.