# Conclusion & Perspectives {.page_break_before}

The objective of the presented developments is their integration into a more integrated chemical composition approach, from the plant (or the holobiont) to the molecule, and back.

These developments included the development of a way to inform the annotated chemistry of a sample, depending on its biological source.
Gradually, this approach, together with other ones [@doi:10.1186/s13321-021-00559-3] should lead to more reliable annotations and a better-defined origin of the *metabolome*.
A better description of metabolites will help answer fundamental biological questions about the divergence of metabolism between species, its role [@doi:10.3390/plants10112393], and how best to harness it for human health [@doi:10.1038/s41587-022-01368-1].

In fact, access to *the metabolome* is still a long way off, which leaves the door open for further research.
The first limitation of our knowledge of the metabolome through [MS](#ms)-based approaches is their intrinsic limitation to access the [2D](#dd) structure of metabolites and not their [3D](#ddd) configuration.
Biological systems, however, evolve in a [3D](#ddd) environment, made of a [3D](#ddd) metabolome.
Linked to the bitter taste studied in Chapter @sec:sapid, some stereoisomers of lyoniresinol, a compound known to have an impact on the bitterness of wine, were reported with completely different tastes [@doi:10.1016/j.aca.2015.06.061].
(+)-lyoniresinol was strongly bitter, its enantiomer was tasteless and epi-lyoniresinol was slightly sweet [@doi:10.1016/j.aca.2015.06.061].
Some technical limitations of [MS](#ms) will probably be overcome in the coming years, with the use of new fragmentation techniques [@doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00440] or the improvement of existing ion mobility [MS](#ms) technology [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.10.007].
These technical advances will allow scientists to obtain an ever larger and brighter picture of the metabolome, with the drawback of documenting and sharing ever more complex data.

This will start with better reporting practices for the occurrence of chemical compounds in living organisms.
Solid open science practices, combining spectral repositories [@doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0916-7] with adequate controlled metadata [@doi:10.1093/pcp/pcab173] (both related to the instrumentation used and the studied organism) will greatly help in this respect.
Chapter @sec:lotus laid the groundwork for such a challenging task.
With access to semantic data models and *informed machine learning* approaches [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.6023496], allowing prior expert knowledge to be integrated into learning systems [@doi:10.1109/TKDE.2021.3079836] biological knowledge extraction from metabolomics is expected to reach a whole new level.

As illustrated in Figure @fig:intro-1, at the scale of the tree of Life, the chemical knowledge is still very limited (5 compounds per organism, on the few studied organisms, Figure @fig:distribution).
Fortunately, research is progressing on model organisms that can serve as a basis for a more complete study of the remaining species.

To illustrate this idea, a Tanglegram of the 50 most chemically studied (not necessarily model) organisms together with 50 randomly selected organisms is illustrated in Figure @fig:disc-tanglegram.
The close connection between biology and chemistry is highlighted.
The randomly selected organisms (in grey), cluster relatively well with their biologically closest chemically studied organisms (in black).
The chemical matrix used to build the chemical tree was informed biosynthetically [@doi:10.1007/s00049-017-0250-4] through the chemical classes of the compounds. Such biologically and chemically informed matrices [@doi:10.1038/s41589-020-00677-3; @doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.133] should take more place in metabolomics studies.
<!--                         Similarity to *Homo sapiens*
Homo sapiens                       1724.7861
Arabidopsis thaliana                645.9382
Escherichia coli                    583.5809
Trypanosoma brucei                  281.7078
Vitis vinifera                      205.6855
Drosophila melanogaster             176.4759 -->
The interesting grouping of model organisms of distant biological origin (*Homo sapiens*, *Drosophila melanogaster*, *Escherichia coli*, ...) in the chemical tree, suggests that, when strongly studied, access to a common basic metabolism is achieved.
Once this common core metabolism will be better defined, the path to a better definition of specialized metabolism, novel metabolites [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01486-3], and their true biological origin will be open.

![**Tanglegram of the 50 most chemically studied and 50 randomly selected organisms in LOTUS.** On the left, organisms are clustered according to the classical, known, biological taxonomy. On the right, they are clustered based on their chemical content. The entanglement of both trees is shown, with conserved positions in tips colored. If the organism belongs to the most 50 chemically studied organisms, its label is black, else it is grey. The chemical matrix used to build the chemical tree was informed biosynthetically [@doi:10.1007/s00049-017-0250-4].](images/tanglegram_lotus_top50.pdf "disc-tanglegram"){#fig:disc-tanglegram short-caption="Tanglegram of the 50 Most Chemically Studied and 50 Randomly Selected Organisms in Lotus" align="center" width="100%"}

As for other fields, it is difficult and unconventional to generate *absence* data\footnotemark{} in metabolomics.\footnotetext{The statement that a given metabolite \textbf{is not} present, not only \textit{not} stating it is present.}
A first step will therefore be to model pseudoabsence [@doi:10/bctwxw; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0044486], to then be able to better unravel what is present.
Taking advantage of the semi-quantitative approach developed in Chapter @sec:cascade, some finer classification between presence and absence will be possible.
Thus, it should be possible to separate the functional quantitative metabolome from the *metabolic noise*.
Then, future studies aiming at the prediction of Life's metabolism with computational tools will be considered.
As with the above-mentioned dimensionality of chemical compounds, the current reporting of metabolites in organisms is often over-simplified.
A metabolite may be present in one specific organ of the organism studied and absent in another, or even on a smaller scale of compartmentalization.
The same reasoning applies to the temporal dimension.

Tools currently developed to better automate [MS](#ms)-based search (such as MaSSQL [@doi:10.1101/2022.08.06.503000]) and accessible chemical ontologies [@doi:10.1515/pac-2021-2007] will be key players in this quest for a better description of the *metabolome*.
Better ways to express uncertainty in chemical annotation from spectral data will be needed. 
CxSMILES\footnotemark{} have a good chance of being successful in this regard.
\footnotetext{See \url{https://egonw.github.io/cdk-cxsmiles/}}
With improved data quality, access, and adequate tools to assess their uncertainty, it will become possible to document the chemistry of Life on a large scale based on [MS](#ms).
For now, final Figure @fig:disc-full illustrates what is possible today with the literature, and will be possible tomorrow in mass spectrometry.
It was built on biological taxonomy and employs the biological kingdom as tips color (plants in green, fungi in violet, animals in orange, bacteria in grey).
The bars correspond to the chemical pathways found in the biological family (terpenoids in green, shikimates and phenylpropanoids in pink, alkaloids in blue, polyketides in orange, fatty acids in violet, amino acids and peptides in turquoise, and carbohydrates in yellow).

In addition to more practical goals, this thesis, written using a combination of Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] and Pandoc [@doi:10.7717/peerj-cs.112], has attempted, in the most humble measure, to highlight and document [@doi:10.7717/peerj.13712] the chemical richness of Nature.

![**Current knowledge of the chemistry of Life.** The tree generated from current LOTUS data builds on biological taxonomy and employs the biological kingdom as tips color (plants in green, fungi in violet, animals in orange, bacteria in grey). The bars correspond to the chemical classes found in the biological family (terpenoids in green, shikimates and phenylpropanoids in pink, alkaloids in blue, polyketides in orange, fatty acids in violet, amino acids and peptides in turquoise, and carbohydrates in yellow).](images/tree_full.pdf "disc-full"){#fig:disc-full short-caption="Current Knowledge of the Chemistry of Life" align="center" width="95%"}