#### [Feature-Based Molecular Networking—An Exciting Tool to Spot Species of the Genus *Cortinarius* with Hidden Photosensitizers](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11110791) [@doi:10.3390/metabo11110791] {.page_break_before}

##### Abstract {.unlisted .unnumbered}

Fungi have developed a wide array of defense strategies to overcome mechanical injuries and pathogen infections.
Recently, photoactivity has been discovered by showing that pigments isolated from *Cortinarius uliginosus* produce singlet oxygen under irradiation.
To test if this phenomenon is limited to dermocyboid Cortinarii, six colourful *Cortinarius* species belonging to different classical subgenera (i.e., *Dermocybe*, *Leprocybe*, *Myxacium*, *Phlegmacium*, and *Telamonia*) were investigated.
Fungal extracts were explored by the combination of in vitro photobiological methods, [UHPLC](#uhplc) coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry ([UHPLC](#uhplc)-[HR](#hr)[MS^2^](#ms2)), feature-based molecular networking ([FBMN](#fbmn)), and metabolite dereplication techniques.
The fungi *C. rubrophyllus* (*Dermocybe*) and *C. xanthophyllus* (*Phlegmacium*) exhibited promising photobiological activity in a low concentration range (1–7 *µ*g/mL).
Using [UHPLC](#uhplc)-[HR](#hr)[MS^2^](#ms2)-based metabolomic tools, the underlying photoactive principle was investigated.
Several monomeric and dimeric anthraquinones were annotated as compounds responsible for the photoactivity.
Furthermore, the results showed that light-induced activity is not restricted to a single subgenus, but rather is a trait of *Cortinarius* species of different phylogenetic lineages and is linked to the presence of fungal anthraquinones.
This study highlights the genus *Cortinarius* as a promising source for novel photopharmaceuticals.
Additionally, we showed that putative dereplication of natural photosensitizers can be done by ([FBMN](#fbmn)).

##### Contribution {.unlisted .unnumbered}

<!-- Conceptualization, -->
Data curation,
Formal Analysis,
<!-- Funding acquisition, -->
Investigation,
<!-- Methodology, -->
<!-- Project administration, -->
<!-- Resources, -->
<!-- Software, -->
<!-- Supervision, -->
<!-- Validation, -->
<!-- Visualization, -->
<!-- Writing – original draft, -->
Writing – review & editing

\newpage