#### Untargeted metabolomics analyses to study taste-active compounds released during post-fermentation maceration of wine {.page_break_before}

##### Abstract {.unlisted .unnumbered}

\small
The sensory properties of a wine depends on its colours, aromas and flavors.
Regarding red wines, the gustatory part consists of the acid, bitter and sweet tastes.
Even if certain compounds were already identified as contributing to the sweetness, some taste modifications remain largely unexplained [@doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.08.070; @doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.129293].
For instance, empirical observations combined with sensory analyzes, have shown that an increase of wine sweetness occurs during post-fermentation maceration [@CretinBordeaux].
This step is a key stage of red winemaking during which the juice is left in contact with the marc, that contains the solid parts of the grape (seeds, skins and sometimes stems).
The present works aims at identifying some compounds responsible for this gain of sweetness.

Recent developments have highlighted the interested of untargeted metabolomic analysis for oenology [@doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.0c00879].
Using similar tools, an approach has been developed here to discover new taste-active molecule.
The analyses were assayed using liquid chromatography–high resolution mass spectrometry ([UHPLC](#uhplc)-Q-Exactive Plus, Orbitrap analyzer).
Data processing was carried out using the MzMine 2 software followed by a differential analysis, statistical study and finally using of molecular networks.

To identify the taste differences induced by vatting, a wine that has undergone post-fermentation maceration (PFM) is compared to the same wine without maceration.
These wines are fractionated according to the same protocol.
Different methods are used together, solid phase extraction (SPE) fractionation and liquid-liquid extraction (ELL, and centrifugal partition chromatography (CPC).
The taste comparison of the fractions from the both modalities made it possible to highlight several fractions where the sweetness was perceived more intense for the PFM modality.
The use of molecular networks in conjunction with tasting notes helps to highlight sweet-tasting compounds. 
\normalsize

##### Contribution {.unlisted .unnumbered}
\small
<!-- Conceptualization, -->
<!-- Data curation, -->
<!-- Formal Analysis, -->
<!-- Funding acquisition, -->
Investigation,
<!-- Methodology, -->
<!-- Project administration, -->
<!-- Resources, -->
<!-- Software, -->
<!-- Supervision, -->
<!-- Validation, -->
Visualization
<!-- Writing – original draft, -->
<!-- Writing – review & editing -->
\normalsize
\newpage