#### [Antiseizure potential of the ancient Greek medicinal plant *Helleborus odorus subsp. cyclophyllus* and identification of its main active principles](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2020.112954) [@doi:10.1016/j.jep.2020.112954] {.page_break_before}

##### Abstract {.unlisted .unnumbered}

**Ethnopharmacological relevance**

Ethnopharmacological data and ancient texts support the use of black hellebore (*Helleborus odorus subsp. cyclophyllus*, Ranunculaceae) for the management and treatment of epilepsy in ancient Greece.

**Aim of the study**

A pharmacological investigation of the root methanolic extract (RME) was conducted using the zebrafish epilepsy model to isolate and identify the compounds responsible for a potential antiseizure activity and to provide evidence of its historical use.
In addition, a comprehensive metabolite profiling of this studied species was proposed.

**Materials and methods**

The roots were extracted by solvents of increasing polarity and root decoction (RDE) was also prepared.
The extracts were evaluated for antiseizure activity using a larval zebrafish epilepsy model with pentylenetetrazole (PTZ)-induced seizures.
The RME exhibited the highest antiseizure activity and was therefore selected for bioactivity-guided fractionation.
Isolated compounds were fully characterized by NMR and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HRMS/MS).
The UHPLC-HRMS/MS analyses of the RME and RDE were used for dereplication and metabolite profiling.

**Results**

The RME showed 80% inhibition of PTZ-induced locomotor activity (300 *μ*g/ml).
This extract was fractionated and resulted in the isolation of a new glucopyranosyl-deoxyribonolactone (**1**) and a new furostanol saponin derivative (**2**), as well as of 20-hydroxyecdysone (**3**), hellebrin (**4**), a spirostanol glycoside derivative (**5**) and deglucohellebrin (**6**).
The antiseizure activity of RME was found to be mainly due to the new furostanol saponin (**2**) and hellebrin (**4**), which reduced 45% and 60% of PTZ-induced seizures (135 *μ*M, respectively).
Besides, the aglycone of hellebrin, hellebrigenin (**S34**), was also active (45% at 7 *μ*M).
To further characterize the chemical composition of both RME and RDE, 30 compounds (**A7-33**, **A35–37**) were annotated based on UHPLC-HRMS/MS metabolite profiling.
This revealed the presence of additional bufadienolides, furostanols, and evidenced alkaloids.

**Conclusions**

This study is the first to identify the molecular basis of the ethnopharmacological use of black hellebore for the treatment of epilepsy.
This was achieved using a microscale zebrafish epilepsy model to rapidly quantify in vivo antiseizure activity.
The UHPLC-HRMS/MS profiling revealed the chemical diversity of the extracts and the presence of numerous bufadienolides, furostanols and ecdysteroids, also present in the decoction.

##### Contribution {.unlisted .unnumbered}

<!-- Conceptualization, -->
<!-- Data curation, -->
<!-- Formal Analysis, -->
<!-- Funding acquisition, -->
Investigation,
<!-- Methodology, -->
<!-- Project administration, -->
<!-- Resources, -->
<!-- Software, -->
<!-- Supervision, -->
<!-- Validation, -->
<!-- Visualization, -->
<!-- Writing – original draft, -->
Writing – review & editing


\newpage