# Additional Contributions {.page_break_before}

## Scientific Articles

### Published

#### [Identification of Antifungal Compounds from the Root Bark of *Cordia anisophylla* J.S. Mill.](https://doi.org/10.21577/0103-5053.20180221) [@doi:10.21577/0103-5053.20180221] {.page_break_before}

##### Abstract {.unlisted .unnumbered}

The dichloromethane extract of the root bark of the Panamanian plant *Cordia anisophylla* J.S. Mill. (Boraginaceae) presented antifungal activity against a susceptible strain of *Candida albicans* in a bioautography primary screening.
The susceptible strain was used to detect minor active compounds that would not have been detected using a classical approach.
In order to identify the antimicrobial compounds, the active extract was fractionated by semi-preparative high-performance liquid chromatography and the fractions were submitted to the antifungal bioassay.
This procedure enabled a precise localization of the antifungal compounds directly in the chromatogram of the crude extract and allowed for an efficient, targeted isolation.
Four compounds were isolated, one of which is a new natural product.
The structures were elucidated using spectroscopic methods.
Their antifungal properties were evaluated by determination of the minimum inhibitory quantity and concentration by bioautography and dilution assay against a wild type strain of *C. albicans*.

##### Contribution {.unlisted .unnumbered}

<!-- Conceptualization, -->
<!-- Data curation, -->
Formal Analysis,
<!-- Funding acquisition, -->
Investigation
<!-- Methodology, -->
<!-- Project administration, -->
<!-- Resources, -->
<!-- Software, -->
<!-- Supervision, -->
<!-- Validation, -->
<!-- Visualization, -->
<!-- Writing – original draft, -->
<!-- Writing – review & editing, -->

\newpage